Hence! Home, you idle creatures, get you home!
Is this a holiday? What, know you not,
Being mechanical, you ought not walk
Upon a laboring day without the sign
Of your profession?--Speak, what trade art thou?
Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
What dost thou with thy best apparel on?--
You, sir, what trade are you?
But what trade art thou? Answer me directly.
What trade, thou knave? Thou naughty knave, what
Yet if you be out, sir, I can mend you.
What mean'st thou by that? Mend me, thou saucy
But wherefore art not in thy shop today?
Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home?
What tributaries follow him to Rome
To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels?
You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless
Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft
Have you climbed up to walls and battlements,
To towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops,
Your infants in your arms, and there have sat
The livelong day, with patient expectation,
To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome.
And when you saw his chariot but appear,
Have you not made an universal shout,
That Tiber trembled underneath her banks
To hear the replication of your sounds
Made in her concave shores?
And do you now put on your best attire?
And do you now cull out a holiday?
And do you now strew flowers in his way
That comes in triumph over Pompey's blood?
Be gone!
Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
That needs must light on this ingratitude.
Go, go, good countrymen, and for this fault
Assemble all the poor men of your sort,
Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears
Into the channel, till the lowest stream
Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.
See whe'er their basest mettle be not moved.
They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.
Go you down that way towards the Capitol.
This way will I. Disrobe the images
If you do find them decked with ceremonies.
You know it is the feast of Lupercal.
It is no matter. Let no images
Be hung with Caesar's trophies. I'll about
And drive away the vulgar from the streets;
So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
These growing feathers plucked from Caesar's wing
Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
Who else would soar above the view of men
And keep us all in servile fearfulness.
Decius, Cicero, Brutus, Cassius, Casca, a Soothsayer;
Calphurnia.
Stand you directly in Antonius' way
When he doth run his course.--Antonius.
Forget not in your speed, Antonius,
To touch Calphurnia, for our elders say
The barren, touched in this holy chase,
Shake off their sterile curse.
When Caesar says "Do this," it is performed.
Set on and leave no ceremony out.	
Bid every noise be still. Peace, yet again!
Who is it in the press that calls on me?
Cry "Caesar." Speak. Caesar is turned to hear.
Beware the ides of March.
Set him before me. Let me see his face.
Fellow, come from the throng.
Look upon Caesar.
What sayst thou to me now? Speak once again.
He is a dreamer. Let us leave him. Pass.
Will you go see the order of the course?
Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.
Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires.
Brutus, I do observe you now of late.
And show of love as I was wont to have.
You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
Over your friend that loves you.
Be not deceived. If I have veiled my look,
Merely upon myself. Vexed I am
Of late with passions of some difference,
Conceptions only proper to myself,
Which give some soil, perhaps, to my behaviors.
But let not therefore my good friends be grieved
Nor construe any further my neglect
Than that poor Brutus, with himself at war,
Forgets the shows of love to other men.
Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion,
By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried
Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?
No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itself
But by reflection, by some other things.
And it is very much lamented, Brutus,
That you have no such mirrors as will turn
Your hidden worthiness into your eye,
That you might see your shadow. I have heard
Where many of the best respect in Rome,
Except immortal Caesar, speaking of Brutus
And groaning underneath this age's yoke,
Have wished that noble Brutus had his eyes.
Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,
That you would have me seek into myself
For that which is not in me?
Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear.
And since you know you cannot see yourself
So well as by reflection, I, your glass,
Will modestly discover to yourself
That of yourself which you yet know not of.
And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus.
Were I a common laughter, or did use
To stale with ordinary oaths my love
To every new protester; if you know
That I do fawn on men and hug them hard
And after scandal them, or if you know
That I profess myself in banqueting
To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.
What means this shouting? I do fear the people
Choose Caesar for their king.
Then must I think you would not have it so.
But wherefore do you hold me here so long?
What is it that you would impart to me?
If it be aught toward the general good,
Set honor in one eye and death i' th' other
And I will look on both indifferently;
For let the gods so speed me as I love
The name of honor more than I fear death.
As well as I do know your outward favor.
Well, honor is the subject of my story.
Think of this life; but, for my single self,
In awe of such a thing as I myself.
We both have fed as well, and we can both
Endure the winter's cold as well as he.
For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,
Caesar said to me "Dar'st thou, Cassius, now
Leap in with me into this angry flood
And swim to yonder point?" Upon the word,
Accoutered as I was, I plunged in
And bade him follow; so indeed he did.
The torrent roared, and we did buffet it
With lusty sinews, throwing it aside
And stemming it with hearts of controversy.
But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
Caesar cried "Help me, Cassius, or I sink!"
Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber
Did I the tired Caesar. And this man
Is now become a god, and Cassius is
If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
He had a fever when he was in Spain,
And when the fit was on him, I did mark
How he did shake. 'Tis true, this god did shake.
His coward lips did from their color fly,
And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
Did lose his luster. I did hear him groan.
Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans
Mark him and write his speeches in their books,
As a sick girl. You gods, it doth amaze me
So get the start of the majestic world
And bear the palm alone.
For some new honors that are heaped on Caesar.
Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world
Like a Colossus, and we petty men
Walk under his huge legs and peep about
To find ourselves dishonorable graves.
Men at some time are masters of their fates.
The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
But in ourselves, that we are underlings.
Why should that name be sounded more than
Write them together, yours is as fair a name;
Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;
Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with 'em,
Now, in the names of all the gods at once,
Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed
That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed!
Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
When went there by an age, since the great flood,
But it was famed with more than with one man?
When could they say, till now, that talked of Rome,
That her wide walks encompassed but one man?
Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough
When there is in it but one only man.
There was a Brutus once that would have brooked
Th' eternal devil to keep his state in Rome
As easily as a king.
That you do love me, I am nothing jealous.
What you would work me to, I have some aim.
How I have thought of this, and of these times,
Be any further moved. What you have said
Both meet to hear and answer such high things.
Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
Brutus had rather be a villager
Than to repute himself a son of Rome
Under these hard conditions as this time
Is like to lay upon us.
Have struck but thus much show of fire from
Brutus.
The games are done, and Caesar is returning.
As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
What hath proceeded worthy note today.
The angry spot doth glow on Caesar's brow,
And all the rest look like a chidden train.
Calphurnia's cheek is pale, and Cicero
Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
As we have seen him in the Capitol,
Being crossed in conference by some senators.
Casca will tell us what the matter is.
Let me have men about me that are fat,
Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep a-nights.
Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look.
He thinks too much. Such men are dangerous.
Fear him not, Caesar; he's not dangerous.
He is a noble Roman, and well given.
Would he were fatter! But I fear him not.
Yet if my name were liable to fear,
So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much,
He is a great observer, and he looks
Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays,
As thou dost, Antony; he hears no music;
Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort
As if he mocked himself and scorned his spirit
That could be moved to smile at anything.
Such men as he be never at heart's ease
Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
And therefore are they very dangerous.
Than what I fear; for always I am Caesar.
Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
And tell me truly what thou think'st of him.
Ay, Casca. Tell us what hath chanced today
That Caesar looks so sad.
They shouted thrice. What was the last cry for?
Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.
It was mere foolery; I did not mark it. I saw Mark
Antony offer him a crown (yet 'twas not a crown
And then he offered it the third time. He put it the
But soft, I pray you. What, did Caesar swoon?
No, Caesar hath it not; but you and I
And honest Casca, we have the falling sickness.
What said he when he came unto himself?
Worships to think it was his infirmity. Three or four
And, after that, he came thus sad away?
What a blunt fellow is this grown to be!
He was quick mettle when he went to school.
So is he now in execution
Of any bold or noble enterprise,
However he puts on this tardy form.
This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
Which gives men stomach to digest his words
With better appetite.
And so it is. For this time I will leave you.
Tomorrow, if you please to speak with me,
Come home to me, and I will wait for you.
Well, Brutus, thou art noble. Yet I see
Thy honorable mettle may be wrought
From that it is disposed. Therefore it is meet
That noble minds keep ever with their likes;
For who so firm that cannot be seduced?
Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus.
If I were Brutus now, and he were Cassius,
He should not humor me. I will this night
In several hands in at his windows throw,
As if they came from several citizens,
Writings, all tending to the great opinion
That Rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely
Caesar's ambition shall be glanced at
And after this, let Caesar seat him sure,
For we will shake him, or worse days endure.
Good even, Casca. Brought you Caesar home?
Why are you breathless? And why stare you so?
Are not you moved, when all the sway of earth
Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero,
Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen
Th' ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam
To be exalted with the threat'ning clouds;
But never till tonight, never till now,
Did I go through a tempest dropping fire.
Either there is a civil strife in heaven,
Or else the world, too saucy with the gods,
Incenses them to send destruction.
Why, saw you anything more wonderful?
Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn
Like twenty torches joined; and yet his hand,
Not sensible of fire, remained unscorched.
Besides ,
Against the Capitol I met a lion,
Who glazed upon me and went surly by
Without annoying me. And there were drawn
Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women,
Transformed with their fear, who swore they saw
Men all in fire walk up and down the streets.
And yesterday the bird of night did sit
Even at noonday upon the marketplace,
Hooting and shrieking. When these prodigies
Do so conjointly meet, let not men say
For I believe they are portentous things
Unto the climate that they point upon.
Indeed, it is a strange-disposed time.
But men may construe things after their fashion,
Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?
He doth, for he did bid Antonius
Send word to you he would be there tomorrow.
Good night then, Casca. This disturbed sky
Is not to walk in.
Who's there?
Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this!
Who ever knew the heavens menace so?
Those that have known the Earth so full of faults.
For my part, I have walked about the streets,
Submitting me unto the perilous night,
And thus unbraced, Casca, as you see,
Have bared my bosom to the thunder-stone;
And when the cross blue lightning seemed to open
The breast of heaven, I did present myself
Even in the aim and very flash of it.
But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?
It is the part of men to fear and tremble
When the most mighty gods by tokens send
Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.
You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life
That should be in a Roman you do want,
Or else you use not. You look pale, and gaze,
And put on fear, and cast yourself in wonder,
To see the strange impatience of the heavens.
But if you would consider the true cause
Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
Why birds and beasts from quality and kind,
Why old men, fools, and children calculate,
Why all these things change from their ordinance,
Their natures, and preformed faculties,
To monstrous quality--why, you shall find
That heaven hath infused them with these spirits
To make them instruments of fear and warning
Unto some monstrous state.
Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man
Most like this dreadful night,
That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars
As doth the lion in the Capitol;
In personal action, yet prodigious grown,
And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.
Let it be who it is. For Romans now
Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors.
But, woe the while, our fathers' minds are dead,
And we are governed with our mothers' spirits.
Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.
Indeed, they say the Senators tomorrow
Mean to establish Caesar as a king,
And he shall wear his crown by sea and land
In every place save here in Italy.
Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius.
Therein, you gods, you make the weak most strong;
Therein, you gods, you tyrants do defeat.
Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron,
Can be retentive to the strength of spirit;
But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
Never lacks power to dismiss itself.
If I know this, know all the world besides,
That part of tyranny that I do bear
So every bondman in his own hand bears
The power to cancel his captivity.
And why should Caesar be a tyrant, then?
Poor man, I know he would not be a wolf
But that he sees the Romans are but sheep;
He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.
Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
Begin it with weak straws. What trash is Rome,
What rubbish, and what offal when it serves
For the base matter to illuminate
So vile a thing as Caesar! But, O grief,
Where hast thou led me? I perhaps speak this
Before a willing bondman; then, I know
My answer must be made. But I am armed,
And dangers are to me indifferent.
You speak to Casca, and to such a man
That is no fleering telltale. Hold. My hand.
Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
And I will set this foot of mine as far
As who goes farthest.
Now know you, Casca, I have moved already
Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans
To undergo with me an enterprise
Of honorable-dangerous consequence.
And I do know by this they stay for me
In Pompey's Porch. For now, this fearful night,
There is no stir or walking in the streets;
And the complexion of the element
In favor 's like the work we have in hand,
Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.
Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.
He is a friend.--Cinna, where haste you so?
To find out you. Who's that? Metellus Cimber?
No, it is Casca, one incorporate
To our attempts. Am I not stayed for, Cinna?
There's two or three of us have seen strange sights.
Yes, you are. O Cassius, if you could
But win the noble Brutus to our party--
Be you content. Good Cinna, take this paper,
And look you lay it in the Praetor's chair,
Where Brutus may but find it; and throw this
In at his window; set this up with wax
Upon old Brutus' statue. All this done,
Repair to Pompey's Porch, where you shall find us.
Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
All but Metellus Cimber, and he's gone
To seek you at your house. Well, I will hie
And so bestow these papers as you bade me.
That done, repair to Pompey's Theater.
Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day
See Brutus at his house. Three parts of him
Is ours already, and the man entire
Upon the next encounter yields him ours.
And that which would appear offense in us
His countenance, like richest alchemy,
Will change to virtue and to worthiness.
Him and his worth and our great need of him
You have right well conceited. Let us go,
For it is after midnight, and ere day
We will awake him and be sure of him.
Give guess how near to day.--Lucius, I say!--
When, Lucius, when? Awake, I say! What, Lucius!
Get me a taper in my study, Lucius.
When it is lighted, come and call me here.
It must be by his death. And for my part
But for the general. He would be crowned:
How that might change his nature, there's the
It is the bright day that brings forth the adder,
And that craves wary walking. Crown him that,
And then I grant we put a sting in him
That at his will he may do danger with.
Th' abuse of greatness is when it disjoins
Remorse from power. And, to speak truth of Caesar,
More than his reason. But 'tis a common proof
That lowliness is young ambition's ladder,
Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;
But, when he once attains the upmost round,
He then unto the ladder turns his back,
Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
By which he did ascend. So Caesar may.
Then, lest he may, prevent. And since the quarrel
Will bear no color for the thing he is,
Fashion it thus: that what he is, augmented,
Would run to these and these extremities.
And therefore think him as a serpent's egg,
Which, hatched, would, as his kind, grow
And kill him in the shell.
The taper burneth in your closet, sir.
Searching the window for a flint, I found
This paper, thus sealed up, and I am sure
It did not lie there when I went to bed.
Get you to bed again. It is not day.
Is not tomorrow, boy, the ides of March?
Look in the calendar, and bring me word.
The exhalations, whizzing in the air,
Give so much light that I may read by them.
Brutus, thou sleep'st. Awake, and see thyself!
Shall Rome, etc. Speak, strike, redress!
Such instigations have been often dropped
Where I have took them up.
Shall Rome stand under one man's awe? What,
Rome?
My ancestors did from the streets of Rome
The Tarquin drive when he was called a king.
To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
If the redress will follow, thou receivest
Thy full petition at the hand of Brutus.
Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,
Between the acting of a dreadful thing
And the first motion, all the interim is
Like a phantasma or a hideous dream.
The genius and the mortal instruments
Are then in council, and the state of man,
Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
The nature of an insurrection.
Sir, 'tis your brother Cassius at the door,
Who doth desire to see you.
No, sir. There are more with him.
No, sir. Their hats are plucked about their ears,
And half their faces buried in their cloaks,
That by no means I may discover them
By any mark of favor.
They are the faction. O conspiracy,
Sham'st thou to show thy dang'rous brow by night,
When evils are most free? O, then, by day
Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none,
Hide it in smiles and affability;
For if thou path, thy native semblance on,
Not Erebus itself were dim enough
To hide thee from prevention.
Metellus, and Trebonius.]
Good morrow, Brutus. Do we trouble you?
Know I these men that come along with you?
Yes, every man of them; and no man here
But honors you, and every one doth wish
You had but that opinion of yourself
Which every noble Roman bears of you.
This is Trebonius.
This, Decius Brutus.
This, Casca; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus Cimber.
What watchful cares do interpose themselves
Betwixt your eyes and night?
Here lies the east; doth not the day break here?
That fret the clouds are messengers of day.
You shall confess that you are both deceived.
Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises,
Which is a great way growing on the south,
Weighing the youthful season of the year.
Some two months hence, up higher toward the
He first presents his fire, and the high east
Stands, as the Capitol, directly here.
Give me your hands all over, one by one.
And let us swear our resolution.
No, not an oath. If not the face of men,
The sufferance of our souls, the time's abuse--
If these be motives weak, break off betimes,
And every man hence to his idle bed.
So let high-sighted tyranny range on
Till each man drop by lottery. But if these--
As I am sure they do--bear fire enough
To kindle cowards and to steel with valor
The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen,
What need we any spur but our own cause
To prick us to redress? What other bond
Than secret Romans that have spoke the word
And will not palter? And what other oath
Than honesty to honesty engaged
That this shall be or we will fall for it?
Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous,
Old feeble carrions, and such suffering souls
That welcome wrongs; unto bad causes swear
Such creatures as men doubt; but do not stain
The even virtue of our enterprise,
Nor th' insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
To think that or our cause or our performance
Did need an oath, when every drop of blood
That every Roman bears, and nobly bears,
Is guilty of a several bastardy
If he do break the smallest particle
Of any promise that hath passed from him.
But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?
Let us not leave him out.
Will purchase us a good opinion
And buy men's voices to commend our deeds.
It shall be said his judgment ruled our hands.
Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
But all be buried in his gravity.
For he will never follow anything
That other men begin.
Shall no man else be touched, but only Caesar?
Decius, well urged. I think it is not meet
Mark Antony, so well beloved of Caesar,
Should outlive Caesar. We shall find of him
If he improve them, may well stretch so far
As to annoy us all; which to prevent,
Let Antony and Caesar fall together.
Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
To cut the head off and then hack the limbs,
Like wrath in death and envy afterwards;
For Antony is but a limb of Caesar.
Let's be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius.
We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,
And in the spirit of men there is no blood.
And not dismember Caesar! But, alas,
Caesar must bleed for it. And, gentle friends,
Let's kill him boldly, but not wrathfully.
Let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds.
And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
Stir up their servants to an act of rage
And after seem to chide 'em. This shall make
Our purpose necessary and not envious;
Which so appearing to the common eyes,
We shall be called purgers, not murderers.
And for Mark Antony, think not of him,
For he can do no more than Caesar's arm
When Caesar's head is off.
For in the engrafted love he bears to Caesar--
Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him.
If he love Caesar, all that he can do
Is to himself: take thought and die for Caesar.
And that were much he should, for he is given
To sports, to wildness, and much company.
There is no fear in him. Let him not die,
For he will live and laugh at this hereafter.
Peace, count the clock.
Whether Caesar will come forth today or no,
For he is superstitious grown of late,
Quite from the main opinion he held once
Of fantasy, of dreams, and ceremonies.
It may be these apparent prodigies,
The unaccustomed terror of this night,
And the persuasion of his augurers
May hold him from the Capitol today.
Never fear that. If he be so resolved,
That unicorns may be betrayed with trees,
And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
Lions with toils, and men with flatterers.
But when I tell him he hates flatterers,
He says he does, being then most flattered.
Let me work,
For I can give his humor the true bent,
And I will bring him to the Capitol.
Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
By the eighth hour, is that the uttermost?
Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,
Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey.
Now, good Metellus, go along by him.
He loves me well, and I have given him reasons.
Send him but hither, and I'll fashion him.
The morning comes upon 's. We'll leave you,
Brutus.
And, friends, disperse yourselves, but all remember
What you have said, and show yourselves true
Romans.
Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily.
Let not our looks put on our purposes,
But bear it, as our Roman actors do,
With untired spirits and formal constancy.
And so good morrow to you every one.
Boy! Lucius!--Fast asleep? It is no matter.
Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber.
Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies
Which busy care draws in the brains of men.
Therefore thou sleep'st so sound.
Portia! What mean you? Wherefore rise you now?
It is not for your health thus to commit
Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.
Nor for yours neither. You've ungently, Brutus,
Stole from my bed. And yesternight at supper
You suddenly arose and walked about,
Musing and sighing, with your arms across,
And when I asked you what the matter was,
You stared upon me with ungentle looks.
And too impatiently stamped with your foot.
Yet I insisted; yet you answered not,
But with an angry wafture of your hand
Gave sign for me to leave you. So I did,
Fearing to strengthen that impatience
Which seemed too much enkindled, and withal
Hoping it was but an effect of humor,
Which sometime hath his hour with every man.
It will not let you eat nor talk nor sleep,
And could it work so much upon your shape
As it hath much prevailed on your condition,
Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.
Brutus is wise and, were he not in health,
He would embrace the means to come by it.
Why so I do. Good Portia, go to bed.
Is Brutus sick? And is it physical
To walk unbraced and suck up the humors
Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick,
And will he steal out of his wholesome bed
To dare the vile contagion of the night
And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air
To add unto his sickness? No, my Brutus,
You have some sick offense within your mind,
Which by the right and virtue of my place
By all your vows of love, and that great vow
Which did incorporate and make us one,
That you unfold to me, your self, your half,
Why you are heavy, and what men tonight
Have had resort to you; for here have been
Some six or seven who did hide their faces
Even from darkness.
Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,
Is it excepted I should know no secrets
That appertain to you? Am I your self
But, as it were, in sort or limitation,
To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,
And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the
Of your good pleasure? If it be no more,
Portia is Brutus' harlot, not his wife.
You are my true and honorable wife,
As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
That visit my sad heart.
If this were true, then should I know this secret.
Think you I am no stronger than my sex,
Being so fathered and so husbanded?
Tell me your counsels; I will not disclose 'em.
Giving myself a voluntary wound
Here, in the thigh. Can I bear that with patience,
And not my husband's secrets?
Render me worthy of this noble wife!	
Hark, hark, one knocks. Portia, go in awhile,
And by and by thy bosom shall partake
The secrets of my heart.
All my engagements I will construe to thee,
All the charactery of my sad brows.
Leave me with haste.	
Lucius, who 's that knocks?
Here is a sick man that would speak with you.
Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spoke of.--
Boy, stand aside.	
Caius Ligarius, how?
Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick!
Any exploit worthy the name of honor.
Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
By all the gods that Romans bow before,
Soul of Rome,
Brave son derived from honorable loins,
Thou like an exorcist hast conjured up
My mortified spirit. Now bid me run,
And I will strive with things impossible,
Yea, get the better of them. What's to do?
But are not some whole that we must make sick?
That must we also. What it is, my Caius,
To whom it must be done.
And with a heart new-fired I follow you
To do I know not what; but it sufficeth
That Brutus leads me on.	
Nor heaven nor Earth have been at peace tonight.
Thrice hath Calphurnia in her sleep cried out
Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,
And bring me their opinions of success.
What mean you, Caesar? Think you to walk forth?
You shall not stir out of your house today.
Caesar shall forth. The things that threatened me
Ne'er looked but on my back. When they shall see
The face of Caesar, they are vanished.
Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies,
Yet now they fright me. There is one within,
Besides the things that we have heard and seen,
Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.
And graves have yawned and yielded up their dead.
Fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds
In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,
Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol.
The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
Horses did neigh, and dying men did groan,
And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
And I do fear them.
Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?
Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions
Are to the world in general as to Caesar.
When beggars die there are no comets seen;
The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of
Cowards die many times before their deaths;
The valiant never taste of death but once.
Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
It seems to me most strange that men should fear,
Seeing that death, a necessary end,
Will come when it will come.
What say the augurers?
They would not have you to stir forth today.
Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
They could not find a heart within the beast.
The gods do this in shame of cowardice.
Caesar should be a beast without a heart
If he should stay at home today for fear.
No, Caesar shall not. Danger knows full well
That Caesar is more dangerous than he.
We are two lions littered in one day,
And I the elder and more terrible.
And Caesar shall go forth.
Your wisdom is consumed in confidence.
Do not go forth today. Call it my fear
That keeps you in the house, and not your own.
We'll send Mark Antony to the Senate House,
And he shall say you are not well today.
Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.	
Mark Antony shall say I am not well,
And for thy humor I will stay at home.
Here's Decius Brutus; he shall tell them so.
Caesar, all hail! Good morrow, worthy Caesar.
And you are come in very happy time
To bear my greeting to the Senators
And tell them that I will not come today.
Cannot is false, and that I dare not, falser.
Say he is sick.
Have I in conquest stretched mine arm so far,
To be afeard to tell graybeards the truth?
Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.
Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,
Lest I be laughed at when I tell them so.
The cause is in my will. I will not come.
That is enough to satisfy the Senate.
But for your private satisfaction,
Because I love you, I will let you know.
Calphurnia here, my wife, stays me at home.
She dreamt tonight she saw my statue,
Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,
Did run pure blood; and many lusty Romans
Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it.
And these does she apply for warnings and portents
And evils imminent, and on her knee
Hath begged that I will stay at home today.
This dream is all amiss interpreted.
It was a vision fair and fortunate.
Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,
In which so many smiling Romans bathed,
Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck
Reviving blood, and that great men shall press
For tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.
This by Calphurnia's dream is signified.
And this way have you well expounded it.
And know it now: the Senate have concluded
To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.
If you shall send them word you will not come,
Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock
Apt to be rendered, for someone to say
When Caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams."
If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
Pardon me, Caesar, for my dear dear love
To your proceeding bids me tell you this,
And reason to my love is liable.
How foolish do your fears seem now, Calphurnia!
Give me my robe, for I will go.
Cinna, and Publius.]
And look where Publius is come to fetch me.
Good morrow, Caesar.
What, Brutus, are you stirred so early too?--
Good morrow, Casca.--Caius Ligarius,
Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy
As that same ague which hath made you lean.--
What is 't o'clock?
See, Antony that revels long a-nights
Is notwithstanding up.--Good morrow, Antony.
Now, Cinna.--Now, Metellus.--What, Trebonius,
Remember that you call on me today;
Be near me that I may remember you.
Caesar, I will.  And so near will I be
That your best friends shall wish I had been further.
Good friends, go in and taste some wine with me,
And we, like friends, will straightway go together.
That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
The heart of Brutus earns to think upon.
Cassius, come not near Casca, have an eye to Cinna,
Decius Brutus loves thee not. Thou hast wronged
Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in all these
Artemidorus
Here will I stand till Caesar pass along,
And as a suitor will I give him this.
My heart laments that virtue cannot live
Out of the teeth of emulation.
If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayest live;
If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.
Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
Why dost thou stay?
Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
Set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue.
How hard it is for women to keep counsel!--
Art thou here yet?
Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
And so return to you, and nothing else?
Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,
For he went sickly forth. And take good note
What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him.
Hark, boy, what noise is that?
And the wind brings it from the Capitol.
Come hither, fellow. Which way hast thou been?
Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
Madam, not yet. I go to take my stand
To see him pass on to the Capitol.
Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not?
That I have, lady. If it will please Caesar
To be so good to Caesar as to hear me,
Why, know'st thou any harms intended towards
None that I know will be, much that I fear may
Good morrow to you.--Here the street is narrow.
The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,
Of senators, of praetors, common suitors,
Will crowd a feeble man almost to death.
Speak to great Caesar as he comes along.	
The heart of woman is! O Brutus,
The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
Sure the boy heard me.  Brutus hath a
That Caesar will not grant.  O, I grow
Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord.
Say I am merry. Come to me again
And bring me word what he doth say to thee.
Casca, Decius, Metellus, Trebonius, Cinna; Publius,
Popilius, Artemidorus, the Soothsayer, and other
Senators and Petitioners.]
Trebonius doth desire you to o'erread,
At your best leisure, this his humble suit.
That touches Caesar nearer. Read it, great Caesar.
What touches us ourself shall be last served.
Delay not, Caesar; read it instantly.
What, is the fellow mad?
What, urge you your petitions in the street?
Come to the Capitol.
He wished today our enterprise might thrive.
Look how he makes to Caesar. Mark him.
Casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention.--
Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,
Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
For I will slay myself.
Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes,
For look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.
Trebonius knows his time, for look you, Brutus,
He draws Mark Antony out of the way.
Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him go
And presently prefer his suit to Caesar.
He is addressed. Press near and second him.
Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
Are we all ready? What is now amiss
That Caesar and his Senate must redress?
Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,
Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat
An humble heart.
These couchings and these lowly courtesies
Might fire the blood of ordinary men
And turn preordinance and first decree
Into the law of children. Be not fond
To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood
That will be thawed from the true quality
With that which melteth fools--I mean sweet
Low-crooked curtsies, and base spaniel fawning.
Thy brother by decree is banished.
If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,
Know: Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause
Will he be satisfied.
Is there no voice more worthy than my own
To sound more sweetly in great Caesar's ear
For the repealing of my banished brother?
Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may
Have an immediate freedom of repeal.
What, Brutus?
Pardon, Caesar; Caesar, pardon!
As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall
To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.
If I could pray to move, prayers would move me.
But I am constant as the Northern Star,
Of whose true fixed and resting quality
There is no fellow in the firmament.
The skies are painted with unnumbered sparks;
They are all fire, and every one doth shine.
But there's but one in all doth hold his place.
So in the world: 'tis furnished well with men,
And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive.
Yet in the number I do know but one
That unassailable holds on his rank,
Unshaked of motion; and that I am he
Let me a little show it, even in this:
That I was constant Cimber should be banished
And constant do remain to keep him so.
Great Caesar--
Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!
Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.
Some to the common pulpits and cry out
People and Senators, be not affrighted.
Fly not; stand still. Ambition's debt is paid.
Go to the pulpit, Brutus.
Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar's
Should chance--
Talk not of standing.--Publius, good cheer.
There is no harm intended to your person,
Nor to no Roman else. So tell them, Publius.
And leave us, Publius, lest that the people,
Rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.
Do so, and let no man abide this deed
But we the doers.
Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run
As it were doomsday.
That we shall die we know; 'tis but the time,
And drawing days out, that men stand upon.
Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
Cuts off so many years of fearing death.
Grant that, and then is death a benefit.
So are we Caesar's friends, that have abridged
His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop,
And let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood
Up to the elbows and besmear our swords.
Then walk we forth, even to the marketplace,
And, waving our red weapons o'er our heads,
Let's all cry "Peace, freedom, and liberty!"
Stoop then, and wash.
How many ages hence
Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
In states unborn and accents yet unknown!
How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
That now on Pompey's basis lies along
No worthier than the dust!
So often shall the knot of us be called
The men that gave their country liberty.
What, shall we forth?
Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.
Soft, who comes here? A friend of Antony's.
Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel.
Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down,
And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:
Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving.
Say, I love Brutus, and I honor him;
Say, I feared Caesar, honored him, and loved him.
If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony
May safely come to him and be resolved
How Caesar hath deserved to lie in death,
Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead
So well as Brutus living, but will follow
The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus
Thorough the hazards of this untrod state
With all true faith. So says my master Antony.
Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman.
Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
He shall be satisfied and, by my honor,
Depart untouched.
That fears him much, and my misgiving still
Falls shrewdly to the purpose.
But here comes Antony.--Welcome, Mark Antony!
Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils
Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.--
Who else must be let blood, who else is rank.
If I myself, there is no hour so fit
As Caesar's death's hour, nor no instrument
Of half that worth as those your swords made rich
With the most noble blood of all this world.
Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
Fulfill your pleasure. Live a thousand years,
No place will please me so, no mean of death,
As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
The choice and master spirits of this age.
Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
As by our hands and this our present act
You see we do, yet see you but our hands
And this the bleeding business they have done.
Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
And pity to the general wrong of Rome
Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part,
To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony.
Our arms in strength of malice, and our hearts
Of brothers' temper, do receive you in
With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.
Your voice shall be as strong as any man's
In the disposing of new dignities.
Only be patient till we have appeased
The multitude, beside themselves with fear;
And then we will deliver you the cause
Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,
Have thus proceeded.
Let each man render me his bloody hand.
First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you.--
Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand.--
Now, Decius Brutus, yours;--now yours,
Metellus;--
Yours, Cinna;--and, my valiant Casca, yours;--
Though last, not least in love, yours, good
Trebonius.--
Gentlemen all--alas, what shall I say?
My credit now stands on such slippery ground
That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
Either a coward or a flatterer.--
That I did love thee, Caesar, O, 'tis true!
If then thy spirit look upon us now,
Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death
To see thy Antony making his peace,
Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes--
Most noble!--in the presence of thy corpse?
Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
It would become me better than to close
In terms of friendship with thine enemies.
Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bayed, brave
Here didst thou fall, and here thy hunters stand
Signed in thy spoil and crimsoned in thy Lethe.
And this indeed, O world, the heart of thee.
How like a deer strucken by many princes
Dost thou here lie!
Mark Antony--
The enemies of Caesar shall say this;
Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.
But what compact mean you to have with us?
Will you be pricked in number of our friends,
Or shall we on and not depend on you?
Therefore I took your hands, but was indeed
Swayed from the point by looking down on Caesar.
Friends am I with you all and love you all,
Upon this hope, that you shall give me reasons
Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.
Or else were this a savage spectacle.
Our reasons are so full of good regard
That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,
You should be satisfied.
And am, moreover, suitor that I may
Produce his body to the marketplace,
And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
Speak in the order of his funeral.
You shall, Mark Antony.
That Antony speak in his funeral.
Know you how much the people may be moved
By that which he will utter?
And show the reason of our Caesar's death.
What Antony shall speak I will protest
He speaks by leave and by permission,
And that we are contented Caesar shall
Have all true rites and lawful ceremonies.
It shall advantage more than do us wrong.
Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar's body.
You shall not in your funeral speech blame us
But speak all good you can devise of Caesar
And say you do 't by our permission,
Else shall you not have any hand at all
About his funeral. And you shall speak
In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
After my speech is ended.
Prepare the body, then, and follow us.
That I am meek and gentle with these butchers.
Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
That ever lived in the tide of times.
Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!
Over thy wounds now do I prophesy
To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue)
Domestic fury and fierce civil strife
Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
Blood and destruction shall be so in use
And dreadful objects so familiar
That mothers shall but smile when they behold
Their infants quartered with the hands of war,
All pity choked with custom of fell deeds;
And Caesar's spirit, ranging for revenge,
With Ate by his side come hot from hell,
Shall in these confines with a monarch's voice
Cry "Havoc!" and let slip the dogs of war,
That this foul deed shall smell above the earth
With carrion men groaning for burial.
You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
He did receive his letters and is coming,
And bid me say to you by word of mouth--
Thy heart is big. Get thee apart and weep.
Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes,
Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,
Began to water. Is thy master coming?
He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome.
Post back with speed and tell him what hath
Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
No Rome of safety for Octavius yet.
Hie hence and tell him so.--Yet stay awhile;
Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corpse
Into the marketplace. There shall I try,
In my oration, how the people take
The cruel issue of these bloody men,
According to the which thou shalt discourse
To young Octavius of the state of things.
Lend me your hand.
We will be satisfied! Let us be satisfied!
Then follow me and give me audience, friends.--
Cassius, go you into the other street
And part the numbers.--
Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;
Those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
And public reasons shall be rendered
Of Caesar's death.
When severally we hear them rendered.
Brutus goes into the pulpit.]
The noble Brutus is ascended. Silence.
Romans, countrymen, and lovers, hear me for my
Rome more. Had you rather Caesar were living, and
There is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor
Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony,
Bring him with triumph home unto his house.
Give him a statue with his ancestors.
Let him be Caesar.
Shall be crowned in Brutus.
We'll bring him to his house with shouts and
My countrymen--
Good countrymen, let me depart alone,
And, for my sake, stay here with Antony.
Do grace to Caesar's corpse, and grace his speech
Tending to Caesar's glories, which Mark Antony
Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.
Stay, ho, and let us hear Mark Antony!
Let him go up into the public chair.
We'll hear him.--Noble Antony, go up.
For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you.
He finds himself beholding to us all.
This Caesar was a tyrant.
We are blest that Rome is rid of him.
Peace, let us hear what Antony can say.
You gentle Romans--
Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears.
The evil that men do lives after them;
The good is oft interred with their bones.
So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus
Hath told you Caesar was ambitious.
If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
And grievously hath Caesar answered it.
Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest
So are they all, all honorable men),
Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral.
He was my friend, faithful and just to me,
But Brutus says he was ambitious,
And Brutus is an honorable man.
He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
Ambition should be made of sterner stuff.
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
And Brutus is an honorable man.
You all did see that on the Lupercal
Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition?
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
And sure he is an honorable man.
But here I am to speak what I do know.
You all did love him once, not without cause.
What cause withholds you, then, to mourn for
And men have lost their reason!--Bear with me;
My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
And I must pause till it come back to me.	
Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
If thou consider rightly of the matter,
Caesar has had great wrong.
Marked you his words? He would not take the
Therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.
If it be found so, some will dear abide it.
Poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.
There's not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.
Now mark him. He begins again to speak.
But yesterday the word of Caesar might
Have stood against the world. Now lies he there,
And none so poor to do him reverence.
Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
Who, you all know, are honorable men.
To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
Than I will wrong such honorable men.
But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar.
Let but the commons hear this testament,
Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read,
And they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds
And dip their napkins in his sacred blood--
Yea, beg a hair of him for memory
And, dying, mention it within their wills,
Bequeathing it as a rich legacy
Unto their issue.
We'll hear the will. Read it, Mark Antony.
The will, the will! We will hear Caesar's will.
Have patience, gentle friends. I must not read it.
It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.
You are not wood, you are not stones, but men.
And, being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
It will inflame you; it will make you mad.
For if you should, O, what would come of it?
Read the will! We'll hear it, Antony.
You shall read us the will, Caesar's will.
Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile?
Whose daggers have stabbed Caesar. I do fear it.
You will compel me, then, to read the will?
Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar,
And let me show you him that made the will.
Shall I descend? And will you give me leave?
Stand from the hearse. Stand from the body.
Room for Antony, most noble Antony.
Nay, press not so upon me. Stand far off.
If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
You all do know this mantle. I remember
The first time ever Caesar put it on.
That day he overcame the Nervii.
Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through.
See what a rent the envious Casca made.
Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabbed,
And, as he plucked his cursed steel away,
Mark how the blood of Caesar followed it,
As rushing out of doors to be resolved
If Brutus so unkindly knocked or no;
For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar's angel.
Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him!
This was the most unkindest cut of all.
For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
Ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms,
Quite vanquished him. Then burst his mighty heart,
And, in his mantle muffling up his face,
Even at the base of Pompey's statue
Then I and you and all of us fell down,
Whilst bloody treason flourished over us.
The dint of pity. These are gracious drops.
Kind souls, what, weep you when you but behold
Our Caesar's vesture wounded? Look you here,
Here is himself, marred as you see with traitors.
Slay! Let not a traitor live!
Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
To such a sudden flood of mutiny.
They that have done this deed are honorable.
What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
That made them do it. They are wise and honorable
And will no doubt with reasons answer you.
But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man
That love my friend, and that they know full well
That gave me public leave to speak of him.
For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech
To stir men's blood. I only speak right on.
Show you sweet Caesar's wounds, poor poor dumb
And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue
In every wound of Caesar that should move
The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.
We'll mutiny.
Away then. Come, seek the conspirators.
Yet hear me, countrymen; yet hear me speak.
Peace, ho! Hear Antony, most noble Antony!
Why, friends, you go to do you know not what.
Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?
Alas, you know not. I must tell you then.
You have forgot the will I told you of.
Most true. The will! Let's stay and hear the will.
Here is the will, and under Caesar's seal:
To every Roman citizen he gives,
To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.
Most noble Caesar! We'll revenge his death.
Moreover, he hath left you all his walks,
His private arbors, and new-planted orchards,
On this side Tiber. He hath left them you,
And to your heirs forever--common pleasures
To walk abroad and recreate yourselves.
Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?
Never, never!--Come, away, away!
We'll burn his body in the holy place
And with the brands fire the traitors' houses.
Take up the body.
Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot;
Take thou what course thou wilt.
How now, fellow?
Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.
He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house.
And thither will I straight to visit him.
He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry
And in this mood will give us anything.
Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.
Belike they had some notice of the people
How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius.
And things unluckily charge my fantasy.
Yet something leads me forth.
Then to answer every man directly and briefly,
Pluck but his name out of his heart, and turn him
Ligarius'. Away, go!
These many, then, shall die; their names are
Your brother too must die. Consent you, Lepidus?
Upon condition Publius shall not live,
Who is your sister's son, Mark Antony.
He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him.
But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar's house;
Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
How to cut off some charge in legacies.
This is a slight, unmeritable man,
Meet to be sent on errands. Is it fit,
The threefold world divided, he should stand
One of the three to share it?
And took his voice who should be pricked to die
In our black sentence and proscription.
Octavius, I have seen more days than you,
And, though we lay these honors on this man
To ease ourselves of diverse sland'rous loads,
He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
To groan and sweat under the business,
Either led or driven, as we point the way;
And having brought our treasure where we will,
Then take we down his load and turn him off
And graze in commons.
But he's a tried and valiant soldier.
So is my horse, Octavius, and for that
It is a creature that I teach to fight,
To wind, to stop, to run directly on,
His corporal motion governed by my spirit;
And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so.
He must be taught and trained and bid go forth--
On objects, arts, and imitations
Which, out of use and staled by other men,
Begin his fashion. Do not talk of him
But as a property. And now, Octavius,
Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius
Are levying powers. We must straight make head.
Therefore let our alliance be combined,
Our best friends made, our means stretched;
And let us presently go sit in council
How covert matters may be best disclosed
And open perils surest answered.
Let us do so, for we are at the stake
And bayed about with many enemies,
And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
Millions of mischiefs.
Titinius and Pindarus meet them.]
What now, Lucilius, is Cassius near?
He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
To do you salutation from his master.
He greets me well.--Your master, Pindarus,
In his own change or by ill officers,
Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
Things done undone, but if he be at hand
But that my noble master will appear
Such as he is, full of regard and honor.
He is not doubted.	
How he received you. Let me be resolved.
With courtesy and with respect enough,
But not with such familiar instances
Nor with such free and friendly conference
As he hath used of old.
When love begins to sicken and decay
It useth an enforced ceremony.
There are no tricks in plain and simple faith;
But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
Make gallant show and promise of their mettle,
But when they should endure the bloody spur,
They fall their crests and, like deceitful jades,
Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?
They mean this night in Sardis to be quartered.
The greater part, the horse in general,
Are come with Cassius.
March gently on to meet him.
Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
Judge me, you gods! Wrong I mine enemies?
And if not so, how should I wrong a brother?
Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs,
And when you do them--
Speak your griefs softly. I do know you well.
Before the eyes of both our armies here
Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away.
Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs,
And I will give you audience.
Bid our commanders lead their charges off
Lucius, do you the like, and let no man
Come to our tent till we have done our conference.
Let Lucilius and Titinius guard our door.
That you have wronged me doth appear in this:
You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella
For taking bribes here of the Sardians,
Wherein my letters, praying on his side
Because I knew the man, was slighted off.
You wronged yourself to write in such a case.
In such a time as this it is not meet
That every nice offense should bear his comment.
Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
Are much condemned to have an itching palm,
To sell and mart your offices for gold
To undeservers.
You know that you are Brutus that speaks this,
Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
The name of Cassius honors this corruption,
And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
Remember March; the ides of March remember.
Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?
What villain touched his body that did stab
And not for justice? What, shall one of us
That struck the foremost man of all this world
But for supporting robbers, shall we now
Contaminate our fingers with base bribes
And sell the mighty space of our large honors
For so much trash as may be grasped thus?
Than such a Roman.
To hedge me in. I am a soldier, I,
Older in practice, abler than yourself
To make conditions.
Urge me no more. I shall forget myself.
Have mind upon your health. Tempt me no farther.
Is 't possible?
Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
All this? Ay, more. Fret till your proud heart break.
Go show your slaves how choleric you are
And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?
Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
Under your testy humor? By the gods,
You shall digest the venom of your spleen
Though it do split you. For, from this day forth,
When you are waspish.
You say you are a better soldier.
Let it appear so, make your vaunting true,
And it shall please me well. For mine own part,
You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus.
Did I say "better"?
When Caesar lived he durst not thus have moved
Peace, peace! You durst not so have tempted him.
What? Durst not tempt him?
Do not presume too much upon my love.
You have done that you should be sorry for.
There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats,
For I am armed so strong in honesty
That they pass by me as the idle wind,
Which I respect not. I did send to you
For certain sums of gold, which you denied me,
For I can raise no money by vile means.
By heaven, I had rather coin my heart
And drop my blood for drachmas than to wring
From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
By any indirection. I did send
To you for gold to pay my legions,
Which you denied me. Was that done like Cassius?
Should I have answered Caius Cassius so?
When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous
To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts;
Dash him to pieces!
My answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart.
But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
You love me not.
As huge as high Olympus.
Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come!
Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
For Cassius is aweary of the world--
Hated by one he loves, braved by his brother,
Checked like a bondman, all his faults observed,
Set in a notebook, learned and conned by rote
To cast into my teeth. O, I could weep
My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
And here my naked breast; within, a heart
Dearer than Pluto's mine, richer than gold.
If that thou be'st a Roman, take it forth.
Strike as thou didst at Caesar, for I know
When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him
Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
Be angry when you will, it shall have scope.
Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
That carries anger as the flint bears fire,
Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark
And straight is cold again.
To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus
When grief and blood ill-tempered vexeth him?
When I spoke that, I was ill-tempered too.
Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.
And my heart too.	
Have not you love enough to bear with me
When that rash humor which my mother gave me
Makes me forgetful?
When you are over-earnest with your Brutus,
He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.
Let me go in to see the Generals.
There is some grudge between 'em; 'tis not meet
They be alone.
For shame, you generals, what do you mean?
Love and be friends as two such men should be,
For I have seen more years, I'm sure, than ye.
Ha, ha, how vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
Get you hence, sirrah! Saucy fellow, hence!
Bear with him, Brutus. 'Tis his fashion.
What should the wars do with these jigging fools?--
Companion, hence!
Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders
Prepare to lodge their companies tonight.
And come yourselves, and bring Messala with you
Immediately to us.	
Of your philosophy you make no use
If you give place to accidental evils.
No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.
How 'scaped I killing when I crossed you so?
Upon what sickness?
And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony
Have made themselves so strong--for with her
That tidings came--with this she fell distract
And, her attendants absent, swallowed fire.
Speak no more of her.--Give me a bowl of wine.--
In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.	
My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.--
Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup;
Come in, Titinius. Welcome, good Messala.
Now sit we close about this taper here,
And call in question our necessities.	
Portia, art thou gone?
Messala, I have here received letters
That young Octavius and Mark Antony
Come down upon us with a mighty power,
Bending their expedition toward Philippi.
Myself have letters of the selfsame tenor.
That by proscription and bills of outlawry,
Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus
Have put to death an hundred senators.
Therein our letters do not well agree.
Mine speak of seventy senators that died
By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.
Cicero one?
And by that order of proscription.
Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?
Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?
Why ask you? Hear you aught of her in yours?
Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true.
Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell,
For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala.
With meditating that she must die once,
Even so great men great losses should endure.
But yet my nature could not bear it so.
Well, to our work alive. What do you think
Of marching to Philippi presently?
So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
Doing himself offense, whilst we, lying still,
Are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.
Good reasons must of force give place to better.
The people 'twixt Philippi and this ground
Do stand but in a forced affection,
For they have grudged us contribution.
The enemy, marching along by them,
By them shall make a fuller number up,
Come on refreshed, new-added, and encouraged,
From which advantage shall we cut him off
If at Philippi we do face him there,
These people at our back.
Under your pardon. You must note besides
That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
Our legions are brim full, our cause is ripe.
The enemy increaseth every day;
We, at the height, are ready to decline.
There is a tide in the affairs of men
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
On such a full sea are we now afloat,
And we must take the current when it serves
Or lose our ventures.
We'll along ourselves and meet them at Philippi.
The deep of night is crept upon our talk,
And nature must obey necessity,
Which we will niggard with a little rest.
There is no more to say.
Early tomorrow will we rise and hence.
Lucius.
My gown.	
Farewell, good Messala.--
Good night, Titinius.--Noble, noble Cassius,
Good night and good repose.
This was an ill beginning of the night.
Never come such division 'tween our souls!
Let it not, Brutus.
Good night, Lord Brutus.
Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?
Here in the tent.
Poor knave, I blame thee not; thou art o'erwatched.
Call Claudius and some other of my men;
It may be I shall raise you by and by
On business to my brother Cassius.
So please you, we will stand and watch your
It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
Look, Lucius, here's the book I sought for so.
Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful.
Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile
And touch thy instrument a strain or two?
Ay, my lord, an 't please you.
It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again.
This is a sleepy tune. O murd'rous slumber,
Layest thou thy leaden mace upon my boy,
That plays thee music?--Gentle knave, good night.
If thou dost nod, thou break'st thy instrument.
Let me see, let me see; is not the leaf turned down
Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.
How ill this taper burns.
Ha, who comes here?--
That shapes this monstrous apparition.
It comes upon me.--Art thou any thing?
Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil,
That mak'st my blood cold and my hair to stare?
Speak to me what thou art.
Thy evil spirit, Brutus.
To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.
Why, I will see thee at Philippi, then.	
Now I have taken heart, thou vanishest.
Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.--
Boy, Lucius!--Varro, Claudius, sirs, awake!
Claudius!
He thinks he still is at his instrument.
Lucius, awake!
Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?
My lord, I do not know that I did cry.
Yes, that thou didst. Didst thou see anything?
Sleep again, Lucius.--Sirrah Claudius!
Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?
Did we, my lord?
Go and commend me to my brother Cassius.
Bid him set on his powers betimes before,
And we will follow.
Now, Antony, our hopes are answered.
You said the enemy would not come down
But keep the hills and upper regions.
It proves not so; their battles are at hand.
They mean to warn us at Philippi here,
Answering before we do demand of them.
Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know
Wherefore they do it. They could be content
To visit other places, and come down
With fearful bravery, thinking by this face
To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage.
But 'tis not so.
The enemy comes on in gallant show.
Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
And something to be done immediately.
Octavius, lead your battle softly on
Upon the left hand of the even field.
Upon the right hand, I; keep thou the left.
Why do you cross me in this exigent?
Lucilius, Titinius, and Messala.]
Stand fast, Titinius. We must out and talk.
Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?
No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.
Make forth. The Generals would have some words.
Words before blows; is it so, countrymen?
Not that we love words better, as you do.
Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.
In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words.
Witness the hole you made in Caesar's heart,
Crying "Long live, hail, Caesar!"
The posture of your blows are yet unknown,
But, for your words, they rob the Hybla bees
And leave them honeyless.
For you have stolen their buzzing, Antony,
And very wisely threat before you sting.
Villains, you did not so when your vile daggers
Hacked one another in the sides of Caesar.
You showed your teeth like apes and fawned like
And bowed like bondmen, kissing Caesar's feet,
Whilst damned Casca, like a cur, behind
Struck Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!
Flatterers?--Now, Brutus, thank yourself!
This tongue had not offended so today
If Cassius might have ruled.
Come, come, the cause. If arguing make us sweat,
The proof of it will turn to redder drops.
Look, I draw a sword against conspirators;
When think you that the sword goes up again?
Never, till Caesar's three and thirty wounds
Be well avenged, or till another Caesar
Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.
Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands
Unless thou bring'st them with thee.
Young man, thou couldst not die more honorable.
Joined with a masker and a reveler!
Old Cassius still.
Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
If you dare fight today, come to the field;
If not, when you have stomachs.
Why now, blow wind, swell billow, and swim bark!
The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
Ho, Lucilius, hark, a word with you.
Messala.
This is my birthday, as this very day
Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala.
Be thou my witness that against my will
Upon one battle all our liberties.
You know that I held Epicurus strong
And his opinion. Now I change my mind
And partly credit things that do presage.
Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign
Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perched,
Gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands,
Who to Philippi here consorted us.
This morning are they fled away and gone,
And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us
As we were sickly prey. Their shadows seem
Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.
Believe not so.
For I am fresh of spirit and resolved
To meet all perils very constantly.
Even so, Lucilius.	
The gods today stand friendly that we may,
Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age.
But since the affairs of men rests still incertain,
Let's reason with the worst that may befall.
If we do lose this battle, then is this
The very last time we shall speak together.
What are you then determined to do?
Even by the rule of that philosophy
By which I did blame Cato for the death
Which he did give himself (I know not how,
But I do find it cowardly and vile,
For fear of what might fall, so to prevent
The time of life), arming myself with patience
To stay the providence of some high powers
That govern us below.
You are contented to be led in triumph
Thorough the streets of Rome?
No, Cassius, no. Think not, thou noble Roman,
That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome.
He bears too great a mind. But this same day
Must end that work the ides of March begun.
And whether we shall meet again, I know not.
Therefore our everlasting farewell take.
Forever and forever farewell, Cassius.
If we do meet again, why we shall smile;
If not, why then this parting was well made.
Forever and forever farewell, Brutus.
If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed;
If not, 'tis true this parting was well made.
Why then, lead on.--O, that a man might know
The end of this day's business ere it come!
But it sufficeth that the day will end,
And then the end is known.--Come ho, away!
Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
Unto the legions on the other side!
Let them set on at once, for I perceive
But cold demeanor in Octavius' wing,
And sudden push gives them the overthrow.
Ride, ride, Messala! Let them all come down.
Titinius.]
Myself have to mine own turned enemy.
This ensign here of mine was turning back;
Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
Took it too eagerly. His soldiers fell to spoil,
Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.
Fly further off, my lord, fly further off!
Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord.
Fly therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
This hill is far enough.--Look, look, Titinius,
Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
They are, my lord.
Mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him
Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
And here again, that I may rest assured
Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.
Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill.
My sight was ever thick. Regard Titinius
And tell me what thou not'st about the field.
This day I breathed first. Time is come round,
And where I did begin, there shall I end;
My life is run his compass.--Sirrah, what news?
Titinius is enclosed round about
With horsemen that make to him on the spur,
Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.
Now Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too.
He's ta'en.	
And hark, they shout for joy.
To see my best friend ta'en before my face!
Come hither, sirrah.
In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,
And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
That whatsoever I did bid thee do
Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine
Now be a freeman, and with this good sword,
That ran through Caesar's bowels, search this
Stand not to answer. Here, take thou the hilts,
And, when my face is covered, as 'tis now,
Guide thou the sword.	
Caesar, thou art revenged
Even with the sword that killed thee.	
So I am free, yet would not so have been,
Durst I have done my will.--O Cassius!--
Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
Where never Roman shall take note of him.
It is but change, Titinius, for Octavius
Is overthrown by noble Brutus' power,
As Cassius' legions are by Antony.
These tidings will well comfort Cassius.
Where did you leave him?
With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
He lies not like the living. O my heart!
Is not that he?
But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,
As in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
So in his red blood Cassius' day is set.
The sun of Rome is set. Our day is gone;
Clouds, dews, and dangers come. Our deeds are
Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
Mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
The things that are not? O error, soon conceived,
Thou never com'st unto a happy birth
But kill'st the mother that engendered thee!
What, Pindarus! Where art thou, Pindarus?
Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet
The noble Brutus, thrusting this report
Into his ears. I may say "thrusting it,"
For piercing steel and darts envenomed
Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
As tidings of this sight.
And I will seek for Pindarus the while.
Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
Did I not meet thy friends, and did not they
Put on my brows this wreath of victory
And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their
Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything.
But hold thee, take this garland on thy brow.
Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
Will do his bidding.--Brutus, come apace,
And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.--
By your leave, gods, this is a Roman's part.
Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart!
Volumnius, and Lucilius, Labeo, and Flavius.]
Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?
Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.
Titinius' face is upward.
Thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords
In our own proper entrails.	
Look whe'er he have not crowned dead Cassius.
Are yet two Romans living such as these?--
The last of all the Romans, fare thee well.
It is impossible that ever Rome
Should breed thy fellow.--Friends, I owe more
To this dead man than you shall see me pay.--
Come, therefore, and to Thasos send his body.
His funerals shall not be in our camp,
Lest it discomfort us.--Lucilius, come.--
And come, young Cato. Let us to the field.--
Labeo and Flavius, set our battles on.
We shall try fortune in a second fight.
Flavius.]
Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!
What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I!
Brutus, my country's friend! Know me for Brutus.
Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius
And mayst be honored, being Cato's son.
Yield, or thou diest.
There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight.
Kill Brutus and be honored in his death.
We must not. A noble prisoner!
Room, ho! Tell Antony Brutus is ta'en.
Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord.
Safe, Antony, Brutus is safe enough.
Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus.
The gods defend him from so great a shame!
When you do find him, or alive or dead,
He will be found like Brutus, like himself.
This is not Brutus, friend, but I assure you,
Give him all kindness. I had rather have
Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,
And see whe'er Brutus be alive or dead,
And bring us word unto Octavius' tent
How everything is chanced.
Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
Statilius showed the torchlight, but, my lord,
He came not back. He is or ta'en or slain.
Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word;
It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus.
What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.
Peace, then, no words.
Hark thee, Dardanus.	
What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.
Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
That it runs over even at his eyes.
Come hither, good Volumnius. List a word.
What says my lord?
The ghost of Caesar hath appeared to me
Two several times by night--at Sardis once
And this last night here in Philippi fields.
Nay, I am sure it is, Volumnius.
Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes.
Our enemies have beat us to the pit.	
It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,
Thou know'st that we two went to school together;
Even for that our love of old, I prithee,
Hold thou my sword hilts whilst I run on it.
That's not an office for a friend, my lord.
Fly, fly, my lord! There is no tarrying here.
Farewell to you--and you--and you, Volumnius.--
Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep.
Farewell to thee, too, Strato.--Countrymen,
My heart doth joy that yet in all my life
More than Octavius and Mark Antony
By this vile conquest shall attain unto.
So fare you well at once, for Brutus' tongue
Hath almost ended his life's history.
Night hangs upon mine eyes; my bones would rest,
That have but labored to attain this hour.
Fly, my lord, fly!
Thou art a fellow of a good respect;
Thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it.
Hold, then, my sword, and turn away thy face
While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?
Give me your hand first. Fare you well, my lord.
Farewell, good Strato.
Caesar, now be still.
Lucilius, and the army.]
My master's man.--Strato, where is thy master?
Free from the bondage you are in, Messala.
The conquerors can but make a fire of him,
For Brutus only overcame himself,
And no man else hath honor by his death.
So Brutus should be found.--I thank thee, Brutus,
That thou hast proved Lucilius' saying true.
All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.--
Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.
Do so, good Messala.
Octavius, then take him to follow thee,
That did the latest service to my master.
This was the noblest Roman of them all.
All the conspirators save only he
Did that they did in envy of great Caesar.
He only in a general honest thought
And common good to all made one of them.
His life was gentle and the elements
So mixed in him that nature might stand up
And say to all the world "This was a man."
According to his virtue, let us use him
With all respect and rites of burial.
Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie,
Most like a soldier, ordered honorably.
So call the field to rest, and let's away
To part the glories of this happy day.
Rowland de Boys. He was my father, and he is
Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this
Therefore, out of my love to you, I came hither to
And thou wert best look to 't, for if thou dost him
And so God keep your Worship.
Now will I stir this gamester. I hope I shall see an
Unless you could teach me to forget a banished
Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.
Nature's. Fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in
Though Nature hath given us wit to flout at Fortune,
Touchstone.] How now, wit, whither wander you?
But if you swear by that that is not, you are not
Enough. Speak no more of him; you'll be whipped
Charles, and Attendants.]
Princess calls for you.
We pray you for your own sake to embrace your
What is thy name, young man?
Rowland de Boys.
The world esteemed thy father honorable,
But I did find him still mine enemy.
Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this
Hadst thou descended from another house.
But fare thee well. Thou art a gallant youth.
Lords, and Attendants.]
Were I my father, coz, would I do this?
His youngest son, and would not change that calling
To be adopted heir to Frederick.
My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,
And all the world was of my father's mind.
Had I before known this young man his son,
Ere he should thus have ventured.
Let us go thank him and encourage him.
My father's rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart.--Sir, you have well deserved.
If you do keep your promises in love
But justly, as you have exceeded all promise,
Your mistress shall be happy.
Gentleman,
Wear this for me--one out of suits with Fortune,
That could give more but that her hand lacks
Shall we go, coz?
Can I not say "I thank you"? My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.
He calls us back. My pride fell with my fortunes.
Sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown
More than your enemies.
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.
Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
To leave this place. Albeit you have deserved
High commendation, true applause, and love,
Yet such is now the Duke's condition
That he misconsters all that you have done.
The Duke is humorous. What he is indeed
More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.
Which of the two was daughter of the duke
That here was at the wrestling?
Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners,
But yet indeed the smaller is his daughter.
The other is daughter to the banished duke,
And here detained by her usurping uncle
To keep his daughter company, whose loves
Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
But I can tell you that of late this duke
Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece,
Grounded upon no other argument
But that the people praise her for her virtues
And pity her for her good father's sake;
And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady
Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you well.
Hereafter, in a better world than this,
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,
From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother.
But heavenly Rosalind!
Orlando.
Look, here comes the Duke.
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste,
And get you from our court.
Within these ten days if that thou beest found
So near our public court as twenty miles,
Thou diest for it.
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me.
If with myself I hold intelligence
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I do not dream or be not frantic--
As I do trust I am not--then, dear uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn
Did I offend your Highness.
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself.
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor.
Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.
Thou art thy father's daughter. There's enough.
So was I when your Highness took his dukedom.
So was I when your Highness banished him.
Treason is not inherited, my lord,
Or if we did derive it from our friends,
What's that to me? My father was no traitor.
Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
To think my poverty is treacherous.
Ay, Celia, we stayed her for your sake;
Else had she with her father ranged along.
It was your pleasure and your own remorse.
But now I know her. If she be a traitor,
Why, so am I. We still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learned, played, eat together,
And, wheresoe'er we went, like Juno's swans
Still we went coupled and inseparable.
She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness,
Her very silence, and her patience
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
Thou art a fool. She robs thee of thy name,
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more
When she is gone. Then open not thy lips.
Firm and irrevocable is my doom
Which I have passed upon her. She is banished.
Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege.
You are a fool.--You, niece, provide yourself.
If you outstay the time, upon mine honor
And in the greatness of my word, you die.
Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
Prithee, be cheerful. Know'st thou not the Duke
Hath banished me, his daughter?
No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one.
Shall we be sundered? Shall we part, sweet girl?
No, let my father seek another heir.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
Whither to go, and what to bear with us,
And do not seek to take your change upon you,
To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out.
For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.
To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden.
Alas, what danger will it be to us,
Maids as we are, to travel forth so far?
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.
And with a kind of umber smirch my face.
The like do you. So shall we pass along
And never stir assailants.
Because that I am more than common tall,
That I did suit me all points like a man?
Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will,
We'll have a swashing and a martial outside--
As many other mannish cowards have
That do outface it with their semblances.
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?
And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
But what will you be called?
Something that hath a reference to my state:
No longer Celia, but Aliena.
But, cousin, what if we assayed to steal
The clownish fool out of your father's court?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel?
He'll go along o'er the wide world with me.
Leave me alone to woo him. Let's away
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight. Now go we in content
To liberty, and not to banishment.
Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
More free from peril than the envious court?
Here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
The seasons' difference, as the icy fang
And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say
That feelingly persuade me what I am."
Sweet are the uses of adversity,
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head.
And this our life, exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in everything.
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a style.
Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
Being native burghers of this desert city,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
Have their round haunches gored.
The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,
And in that kind swears you do more usurp
Than doth your brother that hath banished you.
Today my Lord of Amiens and myself
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak, whose antique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood;
To the which place a poor sequestered stag
That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt
Did come to languish. And indeed, my lord,
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Coursed one another down his innocent nose
In piteous chase. And thus the hairy fool,
Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
Stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook,
Augmenting it with tears.
Did he not moralize this spectacle?
First, for his weeping into the needless stream:
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
To that which had too much." Then, being there
Left and abandoned of his velvet friends:
The flux of company." Anon a careless herd,
Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
And never stays to greet him. "Ay," quoth Jaques,
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?"
Thus most invectively he pierceth through
The body of country, city, court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what's worse,
To fright the animals and to kill them up
In their assigned and native dwelling place.
And did you leave him in this contemplation?
We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
Upon the sobbing deer.
For then he's full of matter.
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be. Some villains of my court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.
The ladies her attendants of her chamber
Saw her abed, and in the morning early
They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.
My lord, the roinish clown at whom so oft
Your Grace was wont to laugh is also missing.
Hisperia, the Princess' gentlewoman,
Confesses that she secretly o'erheard
Your daughter and her cousin much commend
The parts and graces of the wrestler
That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles,
And she believes wherever they are gone
That youth is surely in their company.
Send to his brother. Fetch that gallant hither.
If he be absent, bring his brother to me.
And let not search and inquisition quail
To bring again these foolish runaways.
What, my young master, O my gentle master,
Of old Sir Rowland! Why, what make you here?
Why are you virtuous? Why do people love you?
And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant?
Why would you be so fond to overcome
The bonny prizer of the humorous duke?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
Know you not, master, to some kind of men
Their graces serve them but as enemies?
No more do yours. Your virtues, gentle master,
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.
Envenoms him that bears it!
Come not within these doors. Within this roof
The enemy of all your graces lives.
Your brother--no, no brother--yet the son--
Yet not the son, I will not call him son--
Of him I was about to call his father,
Hath heard your praises, and this night he means
To burn the lodging where you use to lie,
And you within it. If he fail of that,
He will have other means to cut you off.
This is no place, this house is but a butchery.
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.
Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?
No matter whither, so you come not here.
What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food,
Or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce
This I must do, or know not what to do;
Yet this I will not do, do how I can.
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
The thrifty hire I saved under your father,
Which I did store to be my foster nurse
When service should in my old limbs lie lame,
And unregarded age in corners thrown.
Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
Be comfort to my age. Here is the gold.
All this I give you. Let me be your servant.
Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty,
For in my youth I never did apply
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
The means of weakness and debility.
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frosty but kindly. Let me go with you.
In all your business and necessities.
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meed.
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat but for promotion,
And having that do choke their service up
Even with the having. It is not so with thee.
But, poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree
That cannot so much as a blossom yield
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry.
But come thy ways. We'll go along together,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,
We'll light upon some settled low content.
Master, go on, and I will follow thee
To the last gasp with truth and loyalty.
From seventeen years till now almost fourscore
Here lived I, but now live here no more.
At seventeen years, many their fortunes seek,
But at fourscore, it is too late a week.
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Than to die well, and not my master's debtor.
Clown, alias Touchstone.]
When I was at home I was in a better place, but
Look you who comes here, a young man and an old
That is the way to make her scorn you still.
No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow.
But if thy love were ever like to mine--
As sure I think did never man love so--
How many actions most ridiculous
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?
Into a thousand that I have forgotten.
If thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly
That ever love did make thee run into,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
Wearing thy hearer in thy mistress' praise,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not broke from company
Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,
Thou hast not loved.
Alas, poor shepherd, searching of thy wound,
Jove, Jove, this shepherd's passion
Is much upon my fashion.
Peace, I say. 
And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed.
Here's a young maid with travel much oppressed,
And faints for succor.
And wish for her sake more than for mine own
My fortunes were more able to relieve her.
But I am shepherd to another man
And do not shear the fleeces that I graze.
My master is of churlish disposition
And little recks to find the way to heaven
By doing deeds of hospitality.
Besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed
Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now,
By reason of his absence, there is nothing
That you will feed on. But what is, come see,
And in my voice most welcome shall you be.
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?
That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,
That little cares for buying anything.
Buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock,
And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.
And we will mend thy wages. I like this place,
And willingly could waste my time in it.
Assuredly the thing is to be sold.
Go with me. If you like upon report
The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,
And buy it with your gold right suddenly.
Song.
Jaques.
More, I prithee, more.
Song.
Farewell, kind master.	
Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers. For my
Adam.
For I can nowhere find him like a man.
My lord, he is but even now gone hence.
Here was he merry, hearing of a song.
If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
Go seek him. Tell him I would speak with him.
He saves my labor by his own approach.
Why, how now, monsieur? What a life is this
That your poor friends must woo your company?
What, you look merrily.
As I do live by food, I met a fool,
Who laid him down and basked him in the sun
And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms,
In good set terms, and yet a motley fool.
And then he drew a dial from his poke
And, looking on it with lack-luster eye,
Says very wisely "It is ten o'clock.
Thus we may see," quoth he, "how the world wags.
And after one hour more 'twill be eleven.
And so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe,
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot,
And thereby hangs a tale." When I did hear
The motley fool thus moral on the time,
My lungs began to crow like chanticleer
That fools should be so deep-contemplative,
And I did laugh sans intermission
An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
And says "If ladies be but young and fair,
They have the gift to know it." And in his brain,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
After a voyage, he hath strange places crammed
With observation, the which he vents
In mangled forms. O, that I were a fool!
Thou shalt have one.
Provided that you weed your better judgments
Of all opinion that grows rank in them
That I am wise. I must have liberty
Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please, for so fools have.
And they that are most galled with my folly,
They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
The "why" is plain as way to parish church:
He that a fool doth very wisely hit
Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
Not to seem senseless of the bob. If not,
The wise man's folly is anatomized
Even by the squand'ring glances of the fool.
Invest me in my motley. Give me leave
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world,
If they will patiently receive my medicine.
Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.
What, for a counter, would I do but good?
Most mischievous foul sin in chiding sin;
For thou thyself hast been a libertine,
As sensual as the brutish sting itself,
And all th' embossed sores and headed evils
That thou with license of free foot hast caught
Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.
That can therein tax any private party?
Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea
Till that the weary very means do ebb?
What woman in the city do I name
When that I say the city-woman bears
The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she such is her neighbor?
Or what is he of basest function
That says his bravery is not on my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
His folly to the mettle of my speech?
There then. How then, what then? Let me see
My tongue hath wronged him. If it do him right,
Then he hath wronged himself. If he be free,
Why then my taxing like a wild goose flies
Unclaimed of any man.
But who comes here?
Nor shalt not till necessity be served.
Art thou thus boldened, man, by thy distress,
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
That in civility thou seem'st so empty?
You touched my vein at first. The thorny point
Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show
Of smooth civility, yet am I inland bred
And know some nurture. But forbear, I say.
He dies that touches any of this fruit
Till I and my affairs are answered.
What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
More than your force move us to gentleness.
Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.
Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you.
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of stern commandment. But whate'er you are
That in this desert inaccessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time,
If ever you have looked on better days,
If ever been where bells have knolled to church,
If ever sat at any good man's feast,
If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear
And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied,
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be,
In the which hope I blush and hide my sword.
True is it that we have seen better days,
And have with holy bell been knolled to church,
And sat at good men's feasts and wiped our eyes
Of drops that sacred pity hath engendered.
And therefore sit you down in gentleness,
And take upon command what help we have
That to your wanting may be ministered.
Then but forbear your food a little while
Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn
And give it food. There is an old poor man
Who after me hath many a weary step
Limped in pure love. Till he be first sufficed,
Oppressed with two weak evils, age and hunger,
And we will nothing waste till you return.
Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy.
This wide and universal theater
Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
Wherein we play in.
And all the men and women merely players.
They have their exits and their entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
Then the whining schoolboy with his satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances;
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slippered pantaloon
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
Welcome. Set down your venerable burden,
And let him feed.
Welcome. Fall to. I will not trouble you
As yet to question you about your fortunes.--
Give us some music, and, good cousin, sing.
Song.
If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son,
As you have whispered faithfully you were,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
Most truly limned and living in your face,
Be truly welcome hither. I am the duke
That loved your father. The residue of your fortune
Go to my cave and tell me.--Good old man,
Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
Give me your hand,
And let me all your fortunes understand.
Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be.
But were I not the better part made mercy,
Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
Find out thy brother wheresoe'er he is.
Seek him with candle. Bring him, dead or living,
Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our territory.
Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine,
Worth seizure, do we seize into our hands
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth
Of what we think against thee.
More villain thou.--Well, push him out of doors,
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and lands.
Do this expediently, and turn him going.
Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love.
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
That every eye which in this forest looks
Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree
The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.
Touchstone?
And is not the grease of a mutton as wholesome as
It is the right butter-women's rank to market.
This is the very false gallop of verses. Why do you
Change you color?
To say ay and no to these particulars is more than to
Soft, comes he not here?
Atalanta's heels. Will you sit down with me? And we
Signior Love.
Monsieur Melancholy.	
But indeed an old religious uncle of mine taught
They were all like one another as halfpence are,
That is one of the points in the which women still
Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.
He was to imagine me his love, his mistress,
Rosalind.--Come, sister, will you go?
Goths.
Jove in a thatched house.
But what though? Courage. As horns are odious,
Horns? Even so. Poor men alone? No, no. The
Here comes Sir Oliver.--Sir Oliver Martext, you are
How do you, sir? You are very well met. God
Master Oliver, not
But
The very ice of chastity is in them.
Who comes here?
Mistress and master, you have oft inquired
After the shepherd that complained of love,
Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
That was his mistress.
If you will see a pageant truly played
Between the pale complexion of true love
And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you
If you will mark it.
The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
Bring us to this sight, andyou shall say
Sweet Phoebe, do not scorn me. Do not, Phoebe.
Say that you love me not, but say not so
In bitterness. The common executioner,
Whose heart th' accustomed sight of death makes
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
But first begs pardon. Will you sterner be
Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?
Aliena, and Corin.]
Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye.
That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things,
Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
Should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers.
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart,
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee.
Now counterfeit to swoon; why, now fall down;
Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers.
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee.
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some scar of it. Lean upon a rush,
The cicatrice and capable impressure
Thy palm some moment keeps. But now mine eyes,
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not;
Nor I am sure there is no force in eyes
That can do hurt.
If ever--as that ever may be near--
You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
Then shall you know the wounds invisible
That love's keen arrows make.
Come not thou near me. And when that time
Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not,
As till that time I shall not pity thee.
And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,
That you insult, exult, and all at once,
Over the wretched? What though you have no
As, by my faith, I see no more in you
Than without candle may go dark to bed--
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?
Of nature's sale-work.--'Od's my little life,
No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it.
Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream
That can entame my spirits to your worship.--
You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
Like foggy south puffing with wind and rain?
You are a thousand times a properer man
Than she a woman. 'Tis such fools as you
That makes the world full of ill-favored children.
And out of you she sees herself more proper
Than any of her lineaments can show her.--
But, mistress, know yourself. Down on your knees
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love,
For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
Sell when you can; you are not for all markets.
Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer.
Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.--
So take her to thee, shepherd. Fare you well.
Sweet youth, I pray you chide a year together.
Phoebe.)] Why look you so upon me?
For I am falser than vows made in wine.
Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,
Will you go, sister?--Shepherd, ply her hard.--
Come, sister.--Shepherdess, look on him better,
And be not proud. Though all the world could see,
None could be so abused in sight as he.--
Come, to our flock.
Dead shepherd, now I find thy saw of might:
Sweet Phoebe--
Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.
Wherever sorrow is, relief would be.
If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love your sorrow and my grief
Were both extermined.
Thou hast my love. Is not that neighborly?
Silvius, the time was that I hated thee;
And yet it is not that I bear thee love;
But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
But do not look for further recompense
Than thine own gladness that thou art employed.
So holy and so perfect is my love,
And I in such a poverty of grace,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
To glean the broken ears after the man
That the main harvest reaps. Loose now and then
Know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile?
Not very well, but I have met him oft,
And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
That the old carlot once was master of.
Think not I love him, though I ask for him.
But what care I for words? Yet words do well
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
It is a pretty youth--not very pretty--
But sure he's proud--and yet his pride becomes
He'll make a proper man. The best thing in him
Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue
Did make offense, his eye did heal it up.
He is not very tall--yet for his years he's tall.
His leg is but so-so--and yet 'tis well.
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
Than that mixed in his cheek: 'twas just the
Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask.
There be some women, Silvius, had they marked
In parcels as I did, would have gone near
To fall in love with him; but for my part
For what had he to do to chide at me?
He said mine eyes were black and my hair black,
And now I am remembered, scorned at me.
But that's all one: omittance is no quittance.
And thou shalt bear it. Wilt thou, Silvius?
Phoebe, with all my heart.
The matter's in my head and in my heart.
Go with me, Silvius.
Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind.
Look you lisp and wear strange suits, disable all
Why, how now, Orlando, where have you been all
Besides, he brings his destiny with him.
The poor world is almost six thousand years old,
Men have died from time to time and worms have
Saturdays and all.
Orlando.--What do you say, sister?
Orlando--"
Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen, more clamorous
Stop that, 'twill fly with the smoke out at the
Therefore beware my censure, and keep your
Adieu.
We must have your doublet and hose plucked
Duke like a Roman conqueror. And it would do well
Music. Song.
And here much Orlando.
Look who comes here.
My errand is to you, fair youth.
My gentle Phoebe did bid me give you this.
By the stern brow and waspish action
Which she did use as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenor. Pardon me.
Patience herself would startle at this letter
And play the swaggerer. Bear this, bear all.
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners.
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me
Were man as rare as phoenix. 'Od's my will,
Her love is not the hare that I do hunt.
Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
This is a letter of your own device.
No, I protest. I know not the contents.
Phoebe did write it.
And turned into the extremity of love.
That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands.
She has a huswife's hand--but that's no matter.
This is a man's invention, and his hand.
Why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style,
Like Turk to Christian. Women's gentle brain
Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention,
Such Ethiop words, blacker in their effect
Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?
So please you, for I never heard it yet,
Yet heard too much of Phoebe's cruelty.
She Phoebes me. Mark how the tyrant writes.
Can a woman rail thus?
Did you ever hear such railing?
Meaning me a beast.
What, to make thee an instrument and play false
Good morrow, fair ones. Pray you, if you know,
Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
West of this place, down in the neighbor bottom;
The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
But at this hour the house doth keep itself.
There's none within.
If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Then should I know you by description--
Such garments, and such years. "The boy is fair,
Of female favor, and bestows himself
Like a ripe sister; the woman low
And browner than her brother." Are not you
The owner of the house I did inquire for?
It is no boast, being asked, to say we are.
Orlando doth commend him to you both,
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?
Some of my shame, if you will know of me
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
This handkercher was stained.
When last the young Orlando parted from you,
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo, what befell. He threw his eye aside--
And mark what object did present itself:
Under an old oak, whose boughs were mossed with
And high top bald with dry antiquity,
Lay sleeping on his back. About his neck
Who with her head, nimble in threats, approached
The opening of his mouth. But suddenly,
Seeing Orlando, it unlinked itself
And, with indented glides, did slip away
Into a bush, under which bush's shade
Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch
When that the sleeping man should stir--for 'tis
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead.
This seen, Orlando did approach the man
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
And he did render him the most unnatural
That lived amongst men.
For well I know he was unnatural.
But to Orlando: did he leave him there,
Food to the sucked and hungry lioness?
Twice did he turn his back and purposed so,
But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the lioness,
Who quickly fell before him; in which hurtling,
From miserable slumber I awaked.
Was 't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.
But for the bloody napkin?
When from the first to last betwixt us two
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed--
As how I came into that desert place--
In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,
Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brother's love;
Who led me instantly unto his cave,
There stripped himself, and here upon his arm
The lioness had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted,
And cried in fainting upon Rosalind.
Brief, I recovered him, bound up his wound,
And after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
To tell this story, that you might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin
Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.
Why, how now, Ganymede, sweet Ganymede?
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.
There is more in it.--Cousin Ganymede.
That will I, for I must bear answer back
How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.
But I pray you commend my counterfeiting to him.
Will you go?
Here comes the man you mean.
By my troth, we that have good wits have much to
For it is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured
Therefore, you clown, abandon--which is in the
Nay, 'tis true. There was never anything so sudden
Rosalind, if you will.
Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness
To show the letter that I writ to you.
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you.
You are there followed by a faithful shepherd.
Look upon him, love him; he worships you.
Good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.
It is to be all made of sighs and tears,
And so am I for Phoebe.
It is to be all made of faith and service,
And so am I for Phoebe.
It is to be all made of fantasy,
All made of passion and all made of wishes,
All adoration, duty, and observance,
All humbleness, all patience and impatience,
All purity, all trial, all observance,
And so am I for Phoebe.
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
Phoebe.)] I would love you if I could.--Tomorrow
Silvius.)] As you love Phoebe, meet.--And as I love
Here come two of the banished duke's pages.
Song.
God mend your voices.--Come, Audrey.
Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promised?
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
Patience once more whiles our compact is urged.
You will bestow her on Orlando here?
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.
And you say you will have her when I bring her?
That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
You say you'll marry me if I be willing?
That will I, should I die the hour after.
But if you do refuse to marry me,
You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?
You say that you'll have Phoebe if she will?
Though to have her and death were both one thing.
Keep you your word, O duke, to give your
You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter.--
Keep you your word, Phoebe, that you'll marry me,
Or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd.--
Keep your word, Silvius, that you'll marry her
If she refuse me. And from hence I go
To make these doubts all even.
Some lively touches of my daughter's favor.
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
Methought he was a brother to your daughter.
But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born
And hath been tutored in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great magician
Obscured in the circle of this forest.
This is the motley-minded gentleman that I have so
Your "if" is the only peacemaker: much virtue in
He's as good at anything and yet a fool.
To you I give myself, for I am yours.
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
If sight and shape be true,
Why then, my love adieu.
Song.
Even daughter, welcome in no less degree.
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.
Let me have audience for a word or two.
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Addressed a mighty power, which were on foot
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here and put him to the sword;
And to the skirts of this wild wood he came,
Where, meeting with an old religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise and from the world,
His crown bequeathing to his banished brother,
And all their lands restored to them again
That were with him exiled. This to be true
Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding:
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
First, in this forest let us do those ends
That here were well begun and well begot,
And, after, every of this happy number
That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
Shall share the good of our returned fortune
According to the measure of their states.
Meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity,
And fall into our rustic revelry.--
Play, music.--And you brides and bridegrooms all,
With measure heaped in joy to th' measures fall.
Sir, by your patience: if I heard you rightly,
The Duke hath put on a religious life
And thrown into neglect the pompous court.
To him will I. Out of these convertites
There is much matter to be heard and learned.
Your patience and your virtue well deserves it.
Is but for two months victualled.--So to your
To see no pastime, I. What you would have
Proceed, proceed. We'll begin these rites,
As we do trust they'll end, in true delights.
Now is the winter of our discontent
Made glorious summer by this son of York,
And all the clouds that loured upon our house
In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths,
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments,
Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
Grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front;
And now, instead of mounting barbed steeds
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.
But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,
Nor made to court an amorous looking glass;
To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;
Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
Deformed, unfinished, sent before my time
Into this breathing world scarce half made up,
And that so lamely and unfashionable
That dogs bark at me as I halt by them--
Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to see my shadow in the sun
And descant on mine own deformity.
And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover
To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,
By drunken prophecies, libels, and dreams,
To set my brother Clarence and the King
In deadly hate, the one against the other;
And if King Edward be as true and just
As I am subtle, false, and treacherous,
This day should Clarence closely be mewed up
About a prophecy which says that "G"
Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be.
Dive, thoughts, down to my soul. Here Clarence
Brother, good day. What means this armed guard
That waits upon your Grace?
Tend'ring my person's safety, hath appointed
This conduct to convey me to the Tower.
Upon what cause?
George.
Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours.
He should, for that, commit your godfathers.
That you should be new christened in the Tower.
But what's the matter, Clarence? May I know?
Yea, Richard, when I know, for I protest
As yet I do not. But, as I can learn,
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams,
And from the crossrow plucks the letter G,
And says a wizard told him that by "G"
His issue disinherited should be.
And for my name of George begins with G,
It follows in his thought that I am he.
These, as I learn, and such like toys as these
Hath moved his Highness to commit me now.
Why, this it is when men are ruled by women.
My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, 'tis she
That tempers him to this extremity.
Was it not she and that good man of worship,
Anthony Woodeville, her brother there,
That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,
From whence this present day he is delivered?
We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe.
By heaven, I think there is no man secure
But the Queen's kindred and night-walking heralds
That trudge betwixt the King and Mistress Shore.
Heard you not what an humble suppliant
Lord Hastings was to her for his delivery?
Humbly complaining to her Deity
Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty.
If we will keep in favor with the King,
To be her men and wear her livery.
The jealous o'erworn widow and herself,
Since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen,
Are mighty gossips in our monarchy.
His Majesty hath straitly given in charge
That no man shall have private conference,
Of what degree soever, with your brother.
Even so. An please your Worship, Brakenbury,
You may partake of anything we say.
We speak no treason, man. We say the King
Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen
Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous.
We say that Shore's wife hath a pretty foot,
And that the Queen's kindred are made gentlefolks.
How say you, sir? Can you deny all this?
With this, my lord, myself have naught to do.
Naught to do with Mistress Shore? I tell thee,
He that doth naught with her, excepting one,
Were best to do it secretly, alone.
Forbear your conference with the noble duke.
We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.
We are the Queen's abjects and must obey.--
Brother, farewell. I will unto the King,
And whatsoe'er you will employ me in,
Were it to call King Edward's widow "sister,"
Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood
Touches me deeper than you can imagine.
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long.
Meantime, have patience.
Go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return.
Simple, plain Clarence, I do love thee so
That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,
If heaven will take the present at our hands.
But who comes here? The new-delivered Hastings?
Good time of day unto my gracious lord.
As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain.
Well are you welcome to the open air.
How hath your Lordship brooked imprisonment?
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must.
But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks
That were the cause of my imprisonment.
No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too,
For they that were your enemies are his
And have prevailed as much on him as you.
More pity that the eagles should be mewed,
Whiles kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
No news so bad abroad as this at home:
The King is sickly, weak, and melancholy,
And his physicians fear him mightily.
Now, by Saint John, that news is bad indeed.
And overmuch consumed his royal person.
Where is he, in his bed?
Go you before, and I will follow you.
He cannot live, I hope, and must not die
Till George be packed with post-horse up to heaven.
With lies well steeled with weighty arguments,
And, if I fail not in my deep intent,
Clarence hath not another day to live;
Which done, God take King Edward to His mercy,
And leave the world for me to bustle in.
For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter.
What though I killed her husband and her father?
The readiest way to make the wench amends
Is to become her husband and her father;
The which will I, not all so much for love
As for another secret close intent
By marrying her which I must reach unto.
But yet I run before my horse to market.
Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns.
When they are gone, then must I count my gains.
Halberds to guard it, Lady Anne being the mourner,
Set down, set down your honorable load,
If honor may be shrouded in a hearse,
Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament
Th' untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king,
Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster,
Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood,
Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost
To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,
Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtered son,
Stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these
Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life
Cursed the heart that had the heart to do it;
Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence.
More direful hap betide that hated wretch
That makes us wretched by the death of thee
Than I can wish to wolves, to spiders, toads,
Or any creeping venomed thing that lives.
If ever he have child, abortive be it,
Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,
Whose ugly and unnatural aspect
May fright the hopeful mother at the view,
And that be heir to his unhappiness.
If ever he have wife, let her be made
More miserable by the death of him
Than I am made by my young lord and thee.--
Come now towards Chertsey with your holy load,
Taken from Paul's to be interred there.
And still, as you are weary of this weight,
Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry's corse.
Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.
What black magician conjures up this fiend
To stop devoted charitable deeds?
Villains, set down the corse or, by Saint Paul,
My lord, stand back and let the coffin pass.
Unmannered dog, stand thou when I command!--
Advance thy halberd higher than my breast,
Or by Saint Paul I'll strike thee to my foot
And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.
What, do you tremble? Are you all afraid?
Alas, I blame you not, for you are mortal,
And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.--
Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell.
Thou hadst but power over his mortal body;
His soul thou canst not have. Therefore begone.
Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.
Foul devil, for God's sake, hence, and trouble us
For thou hast made the happy Earth thy hell,
Filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
Open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh!--
Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity,
For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood
From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells.
Thy deeds, inhuman and unnatural,
Provokes this deluge most unnatural.--
Either heaven with lightning strike the murderer
Or Earth gape open wide and eat him quick,
As thou dost swallow up this good king's blood,
Which his hell-governed arm hath butchered.
Lady, you know no rules of charity,
Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.
Villain, thou know'st nor law of God nor man.
No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.
But I know none, and therefore am no beast.
More wonderful, when angels are so angry.
Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,
Of these supposed crimes to give me leave
By circumstance but to acquit myself.
Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man,
Of these known evils but to give me leave
By circumstance to curse thy cursed self.
Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have
Some patient leisure to excuse myself.
Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make
No excuse current but to hang thyself.
By such despair I should accuse myself.
And by despairing shalt thou stand excused
For doing worthy vengeance on thyself
That didst unworthy slaughter upon others.
But dead they are, and, devilish slave, by thee.
Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edward's hands.
In thy foul throat thou liest. Queen Margaret saw
Thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood,
The which thou once didst bend against her breast,
But that thy brothers beat aside the point.
That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.
Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind,
That never dream'st on aught but butcheries.
Didst thou not kill this king?
Dost grant me, hedgehog? Then, God grant me too
Thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed.
The better for the King of heaven that hath him.
He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.
Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither,
For he was fitter for that place than Earth.
And thou unfit for any place but hell.
Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.
Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!
So will it, madam, till I lie with you.
To leave this keen encounter of our wits
And fall something into a slower method:
Is not the causer of the timeless deaths
Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,
As blameful as the executioner?
Thou wast the cause and most accursed effect.
Your beauty was the cause of that effect--
Your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep
To undertake the death of all the world,
So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.
If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
These nails should rend that beauty from my
These eyes could not endure that beauty's wrack.
You should not blemish it, if I stood by.
As all the world is cheered by the sun,
So I by that. It is my day, my life.
Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life.
Curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.
It is a quarrel most unnatural
To be revenged on him that loveth thee.
It is a quarrel just and reasonable
To be revenged on him that killed my husband.
He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband
Did it to help thee to a better husband.
His better doth not breathe upon the earth.
He lives that loves thee better than he could.
Name him.
The selfsame name, but one of better nature.
Where is he?
Would it were mortal poison for thy sake.
Never came poison from so sweet a place.
Never hung poison on a fouler toad.
Out of my sight! Thou dost infect mine eyes.
Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.
Would they were basilisks' to strike thee dead.
For now they kill me with a living death.
Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt
Shamed their aspects with store of childish drops.
These eyes, which never shed remorseful tear--
No, when my father York and Edward wept
To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made
When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him;
Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,
Told the sad story of my father's death
And twenty times made pause to sob and weep,
That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks
Like trees bedashed with rain--in that sad time,
My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear;
And what these sorrows could not thence exhale
Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with
My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word.
But now thy beauty is proposed my fee,
My proud heart sues and prompts my tongue to
Teach not thy lip such scorn, for it was made
For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.
If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,
Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword,
Which if thou please to hide in this true breast
And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,
And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
Nay, do not pause, for I did kill King Henry--
But 'twas thy beauty that provoked me.
Nay, now dispatch; 'twas I that stabbed young
Edward--
But 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
Take up the sword again, or take up me.
Arise, dissembler. Though I wish thy death,
Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.
Speak it again and, even with the word,
This hand, which for thy love did kill thy love,
Shall for thy love kill a far truer love.
To both their deaths shalt thou be accessory.
Look how my ring encompasseth thy finger;
Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart.
Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
And if thy poor devoted servant may
But beg one favor at thy gracious hand,
Thou dost confirm his happiness forever.
That it may please you leave these sad designs
To him that hath most cause to be a mourner,
And presently repair to Crosby House,
Where, after I have solemnly interred
At Chertsey monast'ry this noble king
And wet his grave with my repentant tears,
For divers unknown reasons, I beseech you,
Grant me this boon.
With all my heart, and much it joys me too
To see you are become so penitent.--
Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.
Bid me farewell.
But since you teach me how to flatter you,
Imagine I have said "farewell" already.
No, to Whitefriars. There attend my coming.
Was ever woman in this humor wooed?
Was ever woman in this humor won?
What, I that killed her husband and his father,
To take her in her heart's extremest hate,
With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,
The bleeding witness of my hatred by,
Having God, her conscience, and these bars against
And I no friends to back my suit at all
But the plain devil and dissembling looks?
And yet to win her, all the world to nothing!
Ha!
Hath she forgot already that brave prince,
Edward, her lord, whom I some three months since
Stabbed in my angry mood at Tewkesbury?
Framed in the prodigality of nature,
Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal,
The spacious world cannot again afford.
And will she yet abase her eyes on me,
That cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince
And made her widow to a woeful bed?
On me, whose all not equals Edward's moiety?
On me, that halts and am misshapen thus?
My dukedom to a beggarly denier,
Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot,
Myself to be a marv'lous proper man.
And entertain a score or two of tailors
To study fashions to adorn my body.
Since I am crept in favor with myself,
But first I'll turn yon fellow in his grave
And then return lamenting to my love.
Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,
That I may see my shadow as I pass.
Lord Rivers, and Lord Grey.]
Have patience, madam. There's no doubt his
Majesty
Will soon recover his accustomed health.
In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse.
Therefore, for God's sake, entertain good comfort
And cheer his Grace with quick and merry eyes.
If he were dead, what would betide on me?
No other harm but loss of such a lord.
The loss of such a lord includes all harms.
The heavens have blessed you with a goodly son
To be your comforter when he is gone.
Ah, he is young, and his minority
Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,
Is it concluded he shall be Protector?
It is determined, not concluded yet;
But so it must be if the King miscarry.
Here comes the lord of Buckingham, and Derby.
Good time of day unto your royal Grace.
God make your Majesty joyful, as you have been.
The Countess Richmond, good my lord of Derby,
To your good prayer will scarcely say amen.
Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she's your wife
And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured
The envious slanders of her false accusers,
Or if she be accused on true report,
Bear with her weakness, which I think proceeds
From wayward sickness and no grounded malice.
Saw you the King today, my lord of Derby?
But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
Are come from visiting his Majesty.
What likelihood of his amendment, lords?
Madam, good hope. His Grace speaks cheerfully.
God grant him health. Did you confer with him?
Ay, madam. He desires to make atonement
Between the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers,
And between them and my Lord Chamberlain,
And sent to warn them to his royal presence.
Would all were well--but that will never be.
They do me wrong, and I will not endure it!
Who is it that complains unto the King
That I, forsooth, am stern and love them not?
By holy Paul, they love his Grace but lightly
That fill his ears with such dissentious rumors.
Because I cannot flatter and look fair,
Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive, and cog,
Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,
Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,
But thus his simple truth must be abused
With silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?
To who in all this presence speaks your Grace?
To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.
When have I injured thee? When done thee
Or thee?--Or thee? Or any of your faction?
Whom God preserve better than you would wish,
Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while
But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter.
The King, on his own royal disposition,
And not provoked by any suitor else,
Aiming belike at your interior hatred
That in your outward action shows itself
Against my children, brothers, and myself,
Makes him to send, that he may learn the ground.
That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch.
Since every Jack became a gentleman,
There's many a gentle person made a Jack.
Come, come, we know your meaning, brother
Gloucester.
You envy my advancement, and my friends'.
God grant we never may have need of you.
Meantime God grants that we have need of
Our brother is imprisoned by your means,
Myself disgraced, and the nobility
Held in contempt, while great promotions
Are daily given to ennoble those
That scarce some two days since were worth a
By Him that raised me to this careful height
From that contented hap which I enjoyed,
Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been
An earnest advocate to plead for him.
My lord, you do me shameful injury
Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
You may deny that you were not the mean
Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.
She may, Lord Rivers. Why, who knows not so?
She may do more, sir, than denying that.
She may help you to many fair preferments
And then deny her aiding hand therein,
And lay those honors on your high desert.
What may she not? She may, ay, marry, may she--
What, marry, may she? Marry with a king,
Iwis, your grandam had a worser match.
My lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne
Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs.
By heaven, I will acquaint his Majesty
Of those gross taunts that oft I have endured.
Than a great queen with this condition,
To be so baited, scorned, and stormed at.
Small joy have I in being England's queen.
And lessened be that small, God I beseech Him!
Thy honor, state, and seat is due to me.
What, threat you me with telling of the King?
Tell him and spare not. Look, what I have said,
Out, devil! I do remember them too well:
Thou killed'st my husband Henry in the Tower,
And Edward, my poor son, at Tewkesbury.
Ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king,
To royalize his blood, I spent mine own.
Ay, and much better blood than his or thine.
In all which time, you and your husband Grey
Were factious for the House of Lancaster.--
And, Rivers, so were you.--Was not your husband
In Margaret's battle at Saint Albans slain?
Let me put in your minds, if you forget,
What you have been ere this, and what you are;
Withal, what I have been, and what I am.
Poor Clarence did forsake his father Warwick,
Ay, and forswore himself--which Jesu pardon!--
To fight on Edward's party for the crown;
And for his meed, poor lord, he is mewed up.
Or Edward's soft and pitiful, like mine.
Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave this world,
Thou cacodemon! There thy kingdom is.
My lord of Gloucester, in those busy days
Which here you urge to prove us enemies,
We followed then our lord, our sovereign king.
So should we you, if you should be our king.
If I should be? I had rather be a peddler.
Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof.
As little joy, my lord, as you suppose
You should enjoy were you this country's king,
As little joy you may suppose in me
That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.
As little joy enjoys the queen thereof,
For I am she, and altogether joyless.
Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out
In sharing that which you have pilled from me!
Which of you trembles not that looks on me?
If not, that I am queen, you bow like subjects,
Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels.--
Ah, gentle villain, do not turn away.
Foul, wrinkled witch, what mak'st thou in my
But repetition of what thou hast marred.
That will I make before I let thee go.
Wert thou not banished on pain of death?
Than death can yield me here by my abode.
This sorrow that I have by right is yours,
And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.
The curse my noble father laid on thee
When thou didst crown his warlike brows with
And with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes,
And then, to dry them, gav'st the Duke a clout
Steeped in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland--
His curses then, from bitterness of soul
Denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee,
And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.
So just is God to right the innocent.
And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
No man but prophesied revenge for it.
Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.
What, were you snarling all before I came,
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
And turn you all your hatred now on me?
Did York's dread curse prevail so much with
That Henry's death, my lovely Edward's death,
Their kingdom's loss, my woeful banishment,
Should all but answer for that peevish brat?
Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick
Though not by war, by surfeit die your king,
As ours by murder to make him a king.
Prince of Wales,
For Edward our son, that was Prince of Wales,
Die in his youth by like untimely violence.
Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,
Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self.
Long mayst thou live to wail thy children's death
And see another, as I see thee now,
Decked in thy rights, as thou art stalled in mine.
Long die thy happy days before thy death,
And, after many lengthened hours of grief,
Die neither mother, wife, nor England's queen.--
Rivers and Dorset, you were standers-by,
And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son
Was stabbed with bloody daggers. God I pray Him
That none of you may live his natural age,
But by some unlooked accident cut off.
Have done thy charm, thou hateful, withered hag.
And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou shalt hear
If heaven have any grievous plague in store
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
And then hurl down their indignation
On thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace.
The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul.
Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou liv'st,
And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends.
No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,
Unless it be while some tormenting dream
Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils.
Thou elvish-marked, abortive, rooting hog,
Thou that wast sealed in thy nativity
The slave of nature and the son of hell,
Thou slander of thy heavy mother's womb,
Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins,
Thou rag of honor, thou detested--
That thou hadst called me all these bitter names.
Why, so I did, but looked for no reply.
Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.
Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune,
Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider,
Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?
Fool, fool, thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself.
The day will come that thou shalt wish for me
To help thee curse this poisonous bunch-backed
False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,
Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.
Were you well served, you would be taught your
To serve me well, you all should do me duty:
Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects.
Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.
Peace, Master Marquess, you are malapert.
Your fire-new stamp of honor is scarce current.
What 'twere to lose it and be miserable!
They that stand high have many blasts to shake
And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
Good counsel, marry.--Learn it, learn it, marquess.
It touches you, my lord, as much as me.
Ay, and much more; but I was born so high.
Our aerie buildeth in the cedar's top,
And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.
And turns the sun to shade. Alas, alas,
Witness my son, now in the shade of death,
Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath
Hath in eternal darkness folded up.
Your aerie buildeth in our aerie's nest.
As it is won with blood, lost be it so.
Peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity.
Urge neither charity nor shame to me.
And shamefully my hopes by you are butchered.
My charity is outrage, life my shame,
And in that shame still live my sorrows' rage.
In sign of league and amity with thee.
Now fair befall thee and thy noble house!
Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,
Nor thou within the compass of my curse.
Nor no one here, for curses never pass
The lips of those that breathe them in the air.
And there awake God's gentle sleeping peace.
Look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death.
Have not to do with him. Beware of him.
Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,
And all their ministers attend on him.
What doth she say, my lord of Buckingham?
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.
What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel,
And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?
When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,
And say poor Margaret was a prophetess.--
Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
And he to yours, and all of you to God's.	
My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.
And so doth mine. I muse why she's at liberty.
She hath had too much wrong, and I repent
My part thereof that I have done to her.
Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong.
That is too cold in thinking of it now.
Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid;
He is franked up to fatting for his pains.
God pardon them that are the cause thereof.
To pray for them that have done scathe to us.
So do I ever-- being well advised,
For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.
Madam, his Majesty doth call for you,--
And for your Grace,--and yours, my gracious
Catesby, I come.--Lords, will you go with me?
The secret mischiefs that I set abroach
Clarence, who I indeed have cast in darkness,
Namely, to Derby, Hastings, Buckingham,
And tell them 'tis the Queen and her allies
That stir the King against the Duke my brother.
Now they believe it and withal whet me
To be revenged on Rivers, Dorset, Grey;
But then I sigh and, with a piece of scripture,
Tell them that God bids us do good for evil;
And thus I clothe my naked villainy
With odd old ends stol'n forth of Holy Writ,
And seem a saint when most I play the devil.
But soft, here come my executioners.--
How now, my hardy, stout, resolved mates?
Are you now going to dispatch this thing?
We are, my lord, and come to have the warrant
That we may be admitted where he is.
Well thought upon. I have it here about me.
When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.
But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,
Withal obdurate; do not hear him plead,
For Clarence is well-spoken and perhaps
May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.
Tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to prate.
Talkers are no good doers. Be assured
We go to use our hands and not our tongues.
Your eyes drop millstones when fools' eyes fall
Go, go, dispatch.
Why looks your Grace so heavily today?
So full of fearful dreams, of ugly sights,
That, as I am a Christian faithful man,
Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days,
So full of dismal terror was the time.
What was your dream, my lord? I pray you tell me.
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower
And was embarked to cross to Burgundy,
And in my company my brother Gloucester,
Who from my cabin tempted me to walk
Upon the hatches. Thence we looked toward
England
And cited up a thousand heavy times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster,
That had befall'n us. As we paced along
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and in falling
Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard
Into the tumbling billows of the main.
What dreadful noise of waters in my ears,
What sights of ugly death within my eyes.
Methoughts I saw a thousand fearful wracks,
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
All scattered in the bottom of the sea.
Some lay in dead men's skulls, and in the holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept--
As 'twere in scorn of eyes--reflecting gems,
That wooed the slimy bottom of the deep
And mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.
Had you such leisure in the time of death
To gaze upon these secrets of the deep?
Methought I had, and often did I strive
To yield the ghost, but still the envious flood
Stopped in my soul and would not let it forth
To find the empty, vast, and wand'ring air,
But smothered it within my panting bulk,
Who almost burst to belch it in the sea.
Awaked you not in this sore agony?
No, no, my dream was lengthened after life.
With that sour ferryman which poets write of,
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
The first that there did greet my stranger-soul
Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick,
Who spake aloud "What scourge for perjury
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?"
And so he vanished. Then came wand'ring by
Dabbled in blood, and he shrieked out aloud
Clarence,
That stabbed me in the field by Tewkesbury.
Seize on him, furies. Take him unto torment."
With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends
Environed me and howled in mine ears
Such hideous cries that with the very noise
Could not believe but that I was in hell,
Such terrible impression made my dream.
No marvel, lord, though it affrighted you.
Ah keeper, keeper, I have done these things,
That now give evidence against my soul,
For Edward's sake, and see how he requites me.--
But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone!
Keeper, I prithee sit by me awhile.
My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,
Makes the night morning, and the noontide night.
Princes have but their titles for their glories,
An outward honor for an inward toil,
And, for unfelt imaginations,
They often feel a world of restless cares,
So that between their titles and low name
There's nothing differs but the outward fame.
What wouldst thou, fellow? And how cam'st thou
Let him see our commission, and talk no more.
The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands.
Because I will be guiltless from the meaning.
There lies the Duke asleep, and there the keys.
That thus I have resigned to you my charge.
Fare you well.
Where art thou, keeper? Give me a cup of wine.
You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.
In God's name, what art thou?
Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.
My voice is now the King's, my looks mine own.
How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak!
Your eyes do menace me. Why look you pale?
Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so
And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?
Offended us you have not, but the King.
Never, my lord. Therefore prepare to die.
Are you drawn forth among a world of men
To slay the innocent? What is my offense?
Where is the evidence that doth accuse me?
What lawful quest have given their verdict up
Unto the frowning judge? Or who pronounced
The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death
Before I be convict by course of law?
To threaten me with death is most unlawful.
By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins,
That you depart, and lay no hands on me.
The deed you undertake is damnable.
What we will do, we do upon command.
And he that hath commanded is our king.
Erroneous vassals, the great King of kings
Hath in the table of His law commanded
That thou shalt do no murder. Will you then
Spurn at His edict and fulfill a man's?
Take heed, for He holds vengeance in His hand
To hurl upon their heads that break His law.
And that same vengeance doth He hurl on thee
For false forswearing and for murder too.
Thou didst receive the sacrament to fight
In quarrel of the House of Lancaster.
And, like a traitor to the name of God,
Didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous
Unrippedst the bowels of thy sovereign's son.
Whom thou wast sworn to cherish and defend.
How canst thou urge God's dreadful law to us
When thou hast broke it in such dear degree?
Alas! For whose sake did I that ill deed?
For Edward, for my brother, for his sake.
He sends you not to murder me for this,
For in that sin he is as deep as I.
If God will be avenged for the deed,
Take not the quarrel from His powerful arm;
He needs no indirect or lawless course
To cut off those that have offended Him.
Who made thee then a bloody minister
When gallant-springing, brave Plantagenet,
That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?
My brother's love, the devil, and my rage.
Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy faults
Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
If you do love my brother, hate not me.
If you are hired for meed, go back again,
And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,
Who shall reward you better for my life
Than Edward will for tidings of my death.
You are deceived. Your brother Gloucester hates
Go you to him from me.
Tell him, when that our princely father York
Blessed his three sons with his victorious arm,
He little thought of this divided friendship.
Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.
Ay, millstones, as he lessoned us to weep.
Right, as snow in harvest. Come, you deceive
It cannot be, for he bewept my fortune,
And hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobs
That he would labor my delivery.
Why, so he doth, when he delivers you
From this Earth's thralldom to the joys of heaven.
Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.
Have you that holy feeling in your souls
To counsel me to make my peace with God,
And are you yet to your own souls so blind
That you will war with God by murd'ring me?
To do this deed will hate you for the deed.
What shall we do?
Which of you--if you were a prince's son
Being pent from liberty, as I am now--
If two such murderers as yourselves came to you,
Would not entreat for life? Ay, you would beg,
Were you in my distress.
Relent? No. 'Tis cowardly and womanish.
Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.
Come thou on my side and entreat for me.
Take that, and that.  If all this will not
How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands
Of this most grievous murder.
How now? What mean'st thou that thou help'st me
By heavens, the Duke shall know how slack you
Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say,
For I repent me that the Duke is slain.	
So do not I. Go, coward as thou art.
Well, I'll go hide the body in some hole
Till that the Duke give order for his burial.
And when I have my meed, I will away,
For this will out, and then I must not stay.
Lord Marquess Dorset, Rivers, Hastings, Buckingham,
Woodeville, Grey, and Scales.]
Why, so. Now have I done a good day's work.
You peers, continue this united league.
From my Redeemer to redeem me hence,
And more in peace my soul shall part to heaven
Since I have made my friends at peace on Earth.
Rivers and Hastings, take each other's hand.
Dissemble not your hatred. Swear your love.
By heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate,
And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.
So thrive I as I truly swear the like.
Take heed you dally not before your king,
Lest He that is the supreme King of kings
Confound your hidden falsehood and award
Either of you to be the other's end.
So prosper I as I swear perfect love.
And I as I love Hastings with my heart.
Madam, yourself is not exempt from this,--
Nor you, son Dorset,--Buckingham, nor you.
You have been factious one against the other.--
Wife, love Lord Hastings. Let him kiss your hand,
And what you do, do it unfeignedly.
There, Hastings, I will never more remember
Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine.
Dorset, embrace him.--Hastings, love Lord
Marquess.
This interchange of love, I here protest,
Upon my part shall be inviolable.
Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league
With thy embracements to my wife's allies
And make me happy in your unity.
Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate
Upon your Grace, but with all duteous love
Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me
With hate in those where I expect most love.
When I have most need to employ a friend,
And most assured that he is a friend,
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile
Be he unto me: this do I beg of God,
When I am cold in love to you or yours.
Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.
There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here
To make the blessed period of this peace.
Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliffe and the Duke.
Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen,
And, princely peers, a happy time of day.
Happy indeed, as we have spent the day.
Gloucester, we have done deeds of charity,
Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate,
Between these swelling, wrong-incensed peers.
Among this princely heap, if any here
By false intelligence or wrong surmise
Hold me a foe,
If I unwittingly, or in my rage,
Have aught committed that is hardly borne
By any in this presence, I desire
To reconcile me to his friendly peace.
First, madam, I entreat true peace of you,
Which I will purchase with my duteous service;--
Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham,
If ever any grudge were lodged between us;--
Of you and you, Lord Rivers and of Dorset,
That all without desert have frowned on me;--
Of you, Lord Woodeville and Lord Scales;--of you,
Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed, of all.
With whom my soul is any jot at odds
More than the infant that is born tonight.
My sovereign lord, I do beseech your Highness
To take our brother Clarence to your grace.
Why, madam, have I offered love for this,
To be so flouted in this royal presence?
Who knows not that the gentle duke is dead?
You do him injury to scorn his corse.
Who knows not he is dead! Who knows he is?
All-seeing heaven, what a world is this!
Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?
Ay, my good lord, and no man in the presence
But his red color hath forsook his cheeks.
Is Clarence dead? The order was reversed.
But he, poor man, by your first order died,
And that a winged Mercury did bear.
Some tardy cripple bare the countermand,
That came too lag to see him buried.
God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,
Nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood,
Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did,
And yet go current from suspicion.
Then say at once what is it thou requests.
The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life,
Who slew today a riotous gentleman
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.
Have I a tongue to doom my brother's death,
And shall that tongue give pardon to a slave?
My brother killed no man; his fault was thought,
And yet his punishment was bitter death.
Who sued to me for him? Who, in my wrath,
Kneeled at my feet, and bade me be advised?
Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love?
Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
The mighty Warwick and did fight for me?
Who told me, in the field at Tewkesbury,
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,
And said "Dear brother, live, and be a king"?
Who told me, when we both lay in the field
Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me
Even in his garments and did give himself,
All thin and naked, to the numb-cold night?
All this from my remembrance brutish wrath
Sinfully plucked, and not a man of you
Had so much grace to put it in my mind.
But when your carters or your waiting vassals
Have done a drunken slaughter and defaced
The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon,
And I, unjustly too, must grant it you.
But for my brother, not a man would speak,
Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself
For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all
Have been beholding to him in his life,
Yet none of you would once beg for his life.
On me and you, and mine and yours for this!--
Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.--
Ah, poor Clarence.
This is the fruits of rashness. Marked you not
How that the guilty kindred of the Queen
Looked pale when they did hear of Clarence' death?
God will revenge it. Come, lords, will you go
To comfort Edward with our company?
Good grandam, tell us, is our father dead?
Why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast,
And cry "O Clarence, my unhappy son"?
Why do you look on us and shake your head,
And call us orphans, wretches, castaways,
If that our noble father were alive?
My pretty cousins, you mistake me both.
As loath to lose him, not your father's death.
It were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.
Then, you conclude, my grandam, he is dead.
The King mine uncle is to blame for it.
God will revenge it, whom I will importune
With earnest prayers, all to that effect.
Peace, children, peace. The King doth love you
Incapable and shallow innocents,
You cannot guess who caused your father's death.
Grandam, we can, for my good uncle Gloucester
Told me the King, provoked to it by the Queen,
Devised impeachments to imprison him;
And when my uncle told me so, he wept,
And pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek,
Bade me rely on him as on my father,
And he would love me dearly as a child.
Ah, that deceit should steal such gentle shape,
And with a virtuous visor hide deep vice.
He is my son, ay, and therein my shame,
Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.
Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?
Rivers and Dorset after her.]
Ah, who shall hinder me to wail and weep,
To chide my fortune and torment myself?
And to myself become an enemy.
What means this scene of rude impatience?
To make an act of tragic violence.
Edward, my lord, thy son, our king, is dead.
Why grow the branches when the root is gone?
Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?
If you will live, lament. If die, be brief,
That our swift-winged souls may catch the King's,
Or, like obedient subjects, follow him
To his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night.
Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow
As I had title in thy noble husband.
And lived with looking on his images;
But now two mirrors of his princely semblance
Are cracked in pieces by malignant death,
And I, for comfort, have but one false glass
That grieves me when I see my shame in him.
Thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother,
And hast the comfort of thy children left,
But death hath snatched my husband from mine
And plucked two crutches from my feeble hands,
Clarence and Edward. O, what cause have I,
Thine being but a moiety of my moan,
To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries!
Ah, aunt, you wept not for our father's death.
How can we aid you with our kindred tears?
Our fatherless distress was left unmoaned.
Your widow-dolor likewise be unwept!
Give me no help in lamentation.
All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,
That I, being governed by the watery moon,
May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world.
Ah, for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!
Ah, for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!
Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!
What stay had I but Edward? And he's gone.
What stay had we but Clarence? And he's gone.
What stays had I but they? And they are gone.
Was never widow had so dear a loss.
Were never orphans had so dear a loss.
Was never mother had so dear a loss.
Alas, I am the mother of these griefs.
Their woes are parceled; mine is general.
She for an Edward weeps, and so do I;
These babes for Clarence weep, and so do I;
Alas, you three, on me, threefold distressed,
Pour all your tears. I am your sorrow's nurse,
And I will pamper it with lamentation.
Comfort, dear mother. God is much displeased
That you take with unthankfulness His doing.
In common worldly things, 'tis called ungrateful
With dull unwillingness to repay a debt
Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;
Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
For it requires the royal debt it lent you.
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
Of the young prince your son. Send straight for
Let him be crowned. In him your comfort lives.
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward's grave
And plant your joys in living Edward's throne.
Stanley, Earl of Derby, Hastings, and Ratcliffe.]
Sister, have comfort. All of us have cause
To wail the dimming of our shining star,
But none can help our harms by wailing them.--
Madam my mother, I do cry you mercy;
God bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast,
Love, charity, obedience, and true duty.
Amen.  And make me die a good old man!
That is the butt end of a mother's blessing;
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers
That bear this heavy mutual load of moan,
Now cheer each other in each other's love.
Though we have spent our harvest of this king,
We are to reap the harvest of his son.
The broken rancor of your high-swoll'n hates,
But lately splintered, knit, and joined together,
Must gently be preserved, cherished, and kept.
Meseemeth good that with some little train
Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fet
Hither to London, to be crowned our king.
Why "with some little train," my lord of
Buckingham?
Marry, my lord, lest by a multitude
The new-healed wound of malice should break out,
Which would be so much the more dangerous
By how much the estate is green and yet
Where every horse bears his commanding rein
And may direct his course as please himself,
As well the fear of harm as harm apparent,
In my opinion, ought to be prevented.
And the compact is firm and true in me.
And so in me, and so, I think, in all.
Yet since it is but green, it should be put
To no apparent likelihood of breach,
Which haply by much company might be urged.
Therefore I say with noble Buckingham
That it is meet so few should fetch the Prince.
Then be it so, and go we to determine
Who they shall be that straight shall post to
Ludlow.--
Madam, and you, my sister, will you go
To give your censures in this business?
My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince,
For God's sake let not us two stay at home.
For by the way I'll sort occasion,
As index to the story we late talked of,
To part the Queen's proud kindred from the Prince.
My other self, my council's consistory,
My oracle, my prophet, my dear cousin,
Toward Ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind.
Good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?
Hear you the news abroad?
Ill news, by 'r Lady. Seldom comes the better.
Neighbors, God speed.
Doth the news hold of good King Edward's death?
Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while.
Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.
No, no, by God's good grace, his son shall reign.
Woe to that land that's governed by a child.
In him there is a hope of government,
Which, in his nonage, council under him,
And, in his full and ripened years, himself,
No doubt shall then, and till then, govern well.
So stood the state when Henry the Sixth
Was crowned in Paris but at nine months old.
Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot,
For then this land was famously enriched
With politic grave counsel; then the King
Had virtuous uncles to protect his Grace.
Why, so hath this, both by his father and mother.
Better it were they all came by his father,
Or by his father there were none at all,
For emulation who shall now be nearest
Will touch us all too near if God prevent not.
And the Queen's sons and brothers haught and
And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,
This sickly land might solace as before.
Come, come, we fear the worst. All will be well.
When clouds are seen, wise men put on their
When great leaves fall, then winter is at hand;
When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
Untimely storms makes men expect a dearth.
All may be well; but if God sort it so,
Truly, the hearts of men are full of fear.
You cannot reason almost with a man
That looks not heavily and full of dread.
Before the days of change, still is it so.
By a divine instinct, men's minds mistrust
Ensuing danger, as by proof we see
The water swell before a boist'rous storm.
But leave it all to God. Whither away?
Marry, we were sent for to the Justices.
And so was I. I'll bear you company.
Queen Elizabeth, and the Duchess of York.]
Last night, I hear, they lay at Stony Stratford,
And at Northampton they do rest tonight.
Tomorrow or next day they will be here.
But I hear no; they say my son of York
Has almost overta'en him in his growth.
Ay, mother, but I would not have it so.
Why, my good cousin? It is good to grow.
Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper,
My uncle Rivers talked how I did grow
More than my brother. "Ay," quoth my uncle
Gloucester,
And since, methinks I would not grow so fast
Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
In him that did object the same to thee!
He was the wretched'st thing when he was young,
So long a-growing and so leisurely,
That if his rule were true, he should be gracious.
And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.
Now, by my troth, if I had been remembered,
To touch his growth nearer than he touched mine.
How, my young York? I prithee let me hear it.
Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast
That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old.
Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.
His nurse? Why, she was dead ere thou wast born.
If 'twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.
Good madam, be not angry with the child.
Such news, my lord, as grieves me to report.
Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret,
And, with them, Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.
The mighty dukes, Gloucester and Buckingham.
The sum of all I can, I have disclosed.
Why, or for what, the nobles were committed
Is all unknown to me, my gracious lord.
Ay me! I see the ruin of my house.
The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind.
Insulting tyranny begins to jut
Upon the innocent and aweless throne.
Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre.
Accursed and unquiet wrangling days,
How many of you have mine eyes beheld?
My husband lost his life to get the crown,
And often up and down my sons were tossed
For me to joy, and weep, their gain and loss.
And being seated, and domestic broils
Clean overblown, themselves the conquerors
Make war upon themselves, brother to brother,
Blood to blood, self against self. O, preposterous
And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen,
Or let me die, to look on Earth no more.
Come, come, my boy. We will to sanctuary.--
Madam, farewell.
You have no cause.
And thither bear your treasure and your goods.
For my part, I'll resign unto your Grace
The seal I keep; and so betide to me
As well I tender you and all of yours.
Go. I'll conduct you to the sanctuary.
Richard Duke of Gloucester, Buckingham,
Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.
Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign.
The weary way hath made you melancholy.
No, uncle, but our crosses on the way
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy.
Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet dived into the world's deceit;
Nor more can you distinguish of a man
Than of his outward show, which, God He knows,
Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.
Those uncles which you want were dangerous.
Your Grace attended to their sugared words
But looked not on the poison of their hearts.
God keep you from them, and from such false
God keep me from false friends, but they were none.
My lord, the Mayor of London comes to greet you.
God bless your Grace with health and happy days.
Would long ere this have met us on the way.
Fie, what a slug is Hastings that he comes not
To tell us whether they will come or no!
And in good time here comes the sweating lord.
Welcome, my lord. What, will our mother come?
On what occasion God He knows, not I,
The Queen your mother and your brother York
Have taken sanctuary. The tender prince
Would fain have come with me to meet your Grace,
But by his mother was perforce withheld.
Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
Is this of hers!--Lord Cardinal, will your Grace
Persuade the Queen to send the Duke of York
Unto his princely brother presently?--
If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him,
And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.
My lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory
Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate
To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid
We should infringe the holy privilege
Of blessed sanctuary! Not for all this land
Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.
You are too senseless obstinate, my lord,
Too ceremonious and traditional.
Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,
You break not sanctuary in seizing him.
The benefit thereof is always granted
To those whose dealings have deserved the place
And those who have the wit to claim the place.
This prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it
And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it.
Then taking him from thence that is not there,
You break no privilege nor charter there.
Oft have I heard of sanctuary men,
But sanctuary children, never till now.
My lord, you shall o'errule my mind for once.--
Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?
Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
Where it seems best unto your royal self.
If I may counsel you, some day or two
Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower;
Then where you please and shall be thought most fit
For your best health and recreation.
Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place,
Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.
Is it upon record, or else reported
Successively from age to age, he built it?
But say, my lord, it were not registered,
Methinks the truth should live from age to age,
As 'twere retailed to all posterity,
Even to the general all-ending day.
So wise so young, they say, do never live long.
That Julius Caesar was a famous man.
With what his valor did enrich his wit,
His wit set down to make his valor live.
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror,
For now he lives in fame, though not in life.
An if I live until I be a man,
Or die a soldier, as I lived a king.
Short summers lightly have a forward spring.
Cardinal.]
Now in good time here comes the Duke of York.
Richard of York, how fares our loving brother?
Well, my dread lord--so must I call you now.
Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours.
Too late he died that might have kept that title,
Which by his death hath lost much majesty.
How fares our cousin, noble lord of York?
You said that idle weeds are fast in growth.
The Prince my brother hath outgrown me far.
He hath, my lord.
Then he is more beholding to you than I.
He may command me as my sovereign,
But you have power in me as in a kinsman.
My dagger, little cousin? With all my heart.
Of my kind uncle, that I know will give,
And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.
Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.
In weightier things you'll say a beggar nay.
It is too heavy for your Grace to wear.
What, would you have my weapon, little lord?
My lord of York will still be cross in talk.
Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me.--
Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me.
Because that I am little, like an ape,
He thinks that you should bear me on your
With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!
To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,
He prettily and aptly taunts himself.
So cunning and so young is wonderful.
My lord, will 't please you pass along?
Myself and my good cousin Buckingham
Will to your mother, to entreat of her
To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.
What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?
My Lord Protector needs will have it so.
Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost.
My grandam told me he was murdered there.
An if they live, I hope I need not fear.
Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.
Think you, my lord, this little prating York
Was not incensed by his subtle mother
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?
No doubt, no doubt. O, 'tis a parlous boy,
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable.
He is all the mother's, from the top to toe.
Well, let them rest.--Come hither, Catesby.
Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend
As closely to conceal what we impart.
Thou knowest our reasons, urged upon the way.
What thinkest thou? Is it not an easy matter
To make William Lord Hastings of our mind
For the installment of this noble duke
In the seat royal of this famous isle?
He, for his father's sake, so loves the Prince
That he will not be won to aught against him.
What think'st thou then of Stanley? Will not he?
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.
Well then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby,
And, as it were far off, sound thou Lord Hastings
How he doth stand affected to our purpose
And summon him tomorrow to the Tower
To sit about the coronation.
If thou dost find him tractable to us,
Encourage him and tell him all our reasons.
If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling,
Be thou so too, and so break off the talk,
And give us notice of his inclination;
For we tomorrow hold divided councils,
Wherein thyself shalt highly be employed.
Commend me to Lord William. Tell him, Catesby,
His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries
Tomorrow are let blood at Pomfret Castle,
And bid my lord, for joy of this good news,
Give Mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.
Good Catesby, go effect this business soundly.
My good lords both, with all the heed I can.
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?
At Crosby House, there shall you find us both.
Now, my lord, what shall we do if we perceive
Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots?
Chop off his head. Something we will determine.
And look when I am king, claim thou of me
The earldom of Hereford, and all the movables
Whereof the King my brother was possessed.
And look to have it yielded with all kindness.
Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards
We may digest our complots in some form.
Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious nights?
So it appears by that I have to say.
First, he commends him to your noble self.
Then certifies your Lordship that this night
He dreamt the boar had razed off his helm.
Besides, he says there are two councils kept,
And that may be determined at the one
Which may make you and him to rue at th' other.
Therefore he sends to know your Lordship's
If you will presently take horse with him
And with all speed post with him toward the north
To shun the danger that his soul divines.
Go, fellow, go. Return unto thy lord.
Bid him not fear the separated council.
His Honor and myself are at the one,
And at the other is my good friend Catesby,
Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us
Whereof I shall not have intelligence.
Tell him his fears are shallow, without instance.
And for his dreams, I wonder he's so simple
To trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers.
To fly the boar before the boar pursues
Were to incense the boar to follow us
And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.
Go, bid thy master rise and come to me,
And we will both together to the Tower,
Where he shall see the boar will use us kindly.
Many good morrows to my noble lord.
Good morrow, Catesby. You are early stirring.
What news, what news in this our tott'ring state?
It is a reeling world indeed, my lord,
And I believe will never stand upright
Till Richard wear the garland of the realm.
How "wear the garland"? Dost thou mean the
Before I'll see the crown so foul misplaced.
But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?
Ay, on my life, and hopes to find you forward
Upon his party for the gain thereof;
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
That this same very day your enemies,
The kindred of the Queen, must die at Pomfret.
Indeed, I am no mourner for that news,
Because they have been still my adversaries.
But that I'll give my voice on Richard's side
To bar my master's heirs in true descent,
God knows I will not do it, to the death.
God keep your Lordship in that gracious mind.
But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence,
That they which brought me in my master's hate,
Well, Catesby, ere a fortnight make me older
When men are unprepared and look not for it.
With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey; and so 'twill do
With some men else that think themselves as safe
As thou and I, who, as thou know'st, are dear
To princely Richard and to Buckingham.
The Princes both make high account of you--
Come on, come on. Where is your boar-spear, man?
Fear you the boar and go so unprovided?
My lord, good morrow.--Good morrow, Catesby.--
You may jest on, but, by the Holy Rood,
My lord, I hold my life as dear as you do yours,
And never in my days, I do protest,
Was it so precious to me as 'tis now.
Think you but that I know our state secure,
The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London,
Were jocund and supposed their states were sure,
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;
But yet you see how soon the day o'ercast.
This sudden stab of rancor I misdoubt.
Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward!
What, shall we toward the Tower? The day is spent.
Come, come. Have with you. Wot you what, my lord?
Today the lords you talked of are beheaded.
They, for their truth, might better wear their heads
Than some that have accused them wear their hats.
But come, my lord, let's away.
Go on before. I'll talk with this good fellow.
How now, sirrah? How goes the world with thee?
The better that your Lordship please to ask.
Than when thou met'st me last where now we meet.
Then was I going prisoner to the Tower
By the suggestion of the Queen's allies.
But now, I tell thee--keep it to thyself--
This day those enemies are put to death,
And I in better state than e'er I was.
God hold it, to your Honor's good content!
Gramercy, fellow. There, drink that for me.
Well met, my lord. I am glad to see your Honor.
Come the next sabbath, and I will content you.
What, talking with a priest, Lord Chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest;
Your Honor hath no shriving work in hand.
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,
The men you talk of came into my mind.
What, go you toward the Tower?
Nay, like enough, for I stay dinner there.
And supper too, although thou know'st it not.--
Come, will you go?
Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell thee this:
Today shalt thou behold a subject die
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
God bless the Prince from all the pack of you!
You live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.
Dispatch. The limit of your lives is out.
Fatal and ominous to noble peers!
Within the guilty closure of thy walls,
Richard the Second here was hacked to death,
And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,
We give to thee our guiltless blood to drink.
Now Margaret's curse is fall'n upon our heads,
When she exclaimed on Hastings, you, and I,
For standing by when Richard stabbed her son.
Then cursed she Richard. Then cursed she
Buckingham.
Then cursed she Hastings. O, remember, God,
To hear her prayer for them as now for us!
And for my sister and her princely sons,
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.
Make haste. The hour of death is expiate.
Come, Grey. Come, Vaughan. Let us here embrace.
Farewell until we meet again in heaven.
Hastings, Bishop of Ely, Norfolk, Ratcliffe, Lovell, with
Now, noble peers, the cause why we are met
Is to determine of the coronation.
In God's name, speak. When is the royal day?
Is all things ready for the royal time?
It is, and wants but nomination.
Tomorrow, then, I judge a happy day.
Who knows the Lord Protector's mind herein?
Who is most inward with the noble duke?
Your Grace, we think, should soonest know his
We know each other's faces; for our hearts,
He knows no more of mine than I of yours,
Or I of his, my lord, than you of mine.--
Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.
But for his purpose in the coronation,
His gracious pleasure any way therein.
But you, my honorable lords, may name the time,
And in the Duke's behalf I'll give my voice,
Which I presume he'll take in gentle part.
In happy time here comes the Duke himself.
My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.
My absence doth neglect no great design
Which by my presence might have been concluded.
Had you not come upon your cue, my lord,
William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part--
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder.
His Lordship knows me well and loves me well.--
My lord of Ely, when I was last in Holborn
Marry and will, my lord, with all my heart.
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.
Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business
And finds the testy gentleman so hot
That he will lose his head ere give consent
His master's child, as worshipfully he terms it,
Shall lose the royalty of England's throne.
Withdraw yourself awhile. I'll go with you.
We have not yet set down this day of triumph.
Tomorrow, in my judgment, is too sudden,
For I myself am not so well provided
As else I would be, were the day prolonged.
Where is my lord the Duke of Gloucester?
His Grace looks cheerfully and smooth this
There's some conceit or other likes him well
When that he bids good morrow with such spirit.
Can lesser hide his love or hate than he,
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.
What of his heart perceive you in his face
By any livelihood he showed today?
Marry, that with no man here he is offended,
For were he, he had shown it in his looks.
That do conspire my death with devilish plots
Of damned witchcraft, and that have prevailed
Upon my body with their hellish charms?
The tender love I bear your Grace, my lord,
Makes me most forward in this princely presence
To doom th' offenders, whosoe'er they be.
Then be your eyes the witness of their evil.
Look how I am bewitched! Behold mine arm
Is like a blasted sapling withered up;
And this is Edward's wife, that monstrous witch,
Consorted with that harlot, strumpet Shore,
That by their witchcraft thus have marked me.
If they have done this deed, my noble lord--
If? Thou protector of this damned strumpet,
Talk'st thou to me of "ifs"? Thou art a traitor.--
Off with his head. Now by Saint Paul I swear
Lovell and Ratcliffe, look that it be done.--
The rest that love me, rise and follow me.
Woe, woe for England! Not a whit for me,
For I, too fond, might have prevented this.
Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm,
And I did scorn it and disdain to fly.
Three times today my foot-cloth horse did stumble,
And started when he looked upon the Tower,
As loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse.
As too triumphing, how mine enemies
Today at Pomfret bloodily were butchered,
And I myself secure in grace and favor.
Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head.
Come, come, dispatch. The Duke would be at
Make a short shrift. He longs to see your head.
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
Who builds his hope in air of your good looks
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,
Ready with every nod to tumble down
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
Come, come, dispatch. 'Tis bootless to exclaim.
That ever wretched age hath looked upon.--
Come, lead me to the block. Bear him my head.
They smile at me who shortly shall be dead.
Come, cousin, canst thou quake and change thy
Murder thy breath in middle of a word,
And then again begin, and stop again,
As if thou were distraught and mad with terror?
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian,
Speak, and look back, and pry on every side,
Tremble and start at wagging of a straw,
Intending deep suspicion. Ghastly looks
Are at my service, like enforced smiles,
And both are ready, in their offices,
At any time to grace my stratagems.
But what, is Catesby gone?
He is; and see he brings the Mayor along.
Look back! Defend thee! Here are enemies.
God and our innocence defend and guard us!
Be patient. They are friends, Ratcliffe and Lovell.
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.
So dear I loved the man that I must weep.
That breathed upon the Earth a Christian;
Made him my book, wherein my soul recorded
The history of all her secret thoughts.
So smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue
That, his apparent open guilt omitted--
He lived from all attainder of suspects.
Well, well, he was the covert'st sheltered traitor
That ever lived.--
Would you imagine, or almost believe,
Were 't not that by great preservation
We live to tell it, that the subtle traitor
This day had plotted, in the council house,
To murder me and my good lord of Gloucester?
What, think you we are Turks or infidels?
Or that we would, against the form of law,
Proceed thus rashly in the villain's death,
But that the extreme peril of the case,
The peace of England, and our persons' safety
Enforced us to this execution?
Now fair befall you! He deserved his death,
And your good Graces both have well proceeded
To warn false traitors from the like attempts.
After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.
Yet had we not determined he should die
Until your Lordship came to see his end
Something against our meanings, have prevented),
Because, my lord, I would have had you heard
The traitor speak and timorously confess
The manner and the purpose of his treasons,
That you might well have signified the same
Unto the citizens, who haply may
Misconster us in him, and wail his death.
But, my good lord, your Graces' words shall serve
As well as I had seen and heard him speak;
And do not doubt, right noble princes both,
But I'll acquaint our duteous citizens
With all your just proceedings in this case.
And to that end we wished your Lordship here,
Which since you come too late of our intent,
Yet witness what you hear we did intend.
And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid farewell.
Go after, after, cousin Buckingham.
The Mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post.
There, at your meetest vantage of the time,
Infer the bastardy of Edward's children.
Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen
Only for saying he would make his son
Heir to the Crown--meaning indeed his house,
Which, by the sign thereof, was termed so.
Moreover, urge his hateful luxury
And bestial appetite in change of lust,
Which stretched unto their servants, daughters,
Even where his raging eye or savage heart,
Without control, lusted to make a prey.
Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:
Tell them when that my mother went with child
Of that insatiate Edward, noble York
My princely father then had wars in France,
And, by true computation of the time,
Found that the issue was not his begot,
Which well appeared in his lineaments,
Being nothing like the noble duke my father.
Yet touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off,
Because, my lord, you know my mother lives.
Doubt not, my lord. I'll play the orator
As if the golden fee for which I plead
Were for myself. And so, my lord, adieu.
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard's Castle,
Where you shall find me well accompanied
With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops.
Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.
Go, Lovell, with all speed to Doctor Shaa.
Meet me within this hour at Baynard's Castle.
Now will I go to take some privy order
To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight,
And to give order that no manner person
Have any time recourse unto the Princes.
Here is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings,
Which in a set hand fairly is engrossed,
That it may be today read o'er in Paul's.
And mark how well the sequel hangs together:
Eleven hours I have spent to write it over,
For yesternight by Catesby was it sent me;
The precedent was full as long a-doing,
And yet within these five hours Hastings lived,
Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty.
Here's a good world the while! Who is so gross
That cannot see this palpable device?
Yet who so bold but says he sees it not?
Bad is the world, and all will come to naught
When such ill dealing must be seen in thought.
How now, how now? What say the citizens?
Now, by the holy mother of our Lord,
The citizens are mum, say not a word.
Touched you the bastardy of Edward's children?
And his contract by deputy in France;
Th' unsatiate greediness of his desire
And his enforcement of the city wives;
His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy,
As being got, your father then in France,
And his resemblance being not like the Duke.
Withal, I did infer your lineaments,
Being the right idea of your father,
Both in your form and nobleness of mind;
Laid open all your victories in Scotland,
Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace,
Your bounty, virtue, fair humility;
Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose
Untouched or slightly handled in discourse.
And when mine oratory drew toward end,
Cry "God save Richard, England's royal king!"
No. So God help me, they spake not a word
But, like dumb statues or breathing stones,
Stared each on other and looked deadly pale;
Which when I saw, I reprehended them
And asked the Mayor what meant this willful silence.
His answer was, the people were not used
To be spoke to but by the Recorder.
Then he was urged to tell my tale again:
But nothing spoke in warrant from himself.
When he had done, some followers of mine own,
At lower end of the hall, hurled up their caps,
And some ten voices cried "God save King Richard!"
And thus I took the vantage of those few.
Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard"--
And even here brake off and came away.
What tongueless blocks were they! Would they not
Will not the Mayor then and his brethren come?
The Mayor is here at hand. Intend some fear;
Be not you spoke with but by mighty suit.
And look you get a prayer book in your hand
And stand between two churchmen, good my lord,
For on that ground I'll make a holy descant.
And be not easily won to our requests.
Play the maid's part: still answer "nay," and take it.
As I can say "nay" to thee for myself,
No doubt we bring it to a happy issue.
Go, go, up to the leads. The Lord Mayor knocks.
Welcome, my lord. I dance attendance here.
Now, Catesby, what says your lord to my request?
He doth entreat your Grace, my noble lord,
To visit him tomorrow or next day.
He is within, with two right reverend fathers,
Divinely bent to meditation,
And in no worldly suits would he be moved
To draw him from his holy exercise.
Return, good Catesby, to the gracious duke.
Tell him myself, the Mayor, and aldermen,
In deep designs, in matter of great moment
No less importing than our general good,
Are come to have some conference with his Grace.
Ah ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward!
He is not lolling on a lewd love-bed,
But on his knees at meditation;
Not dallying with a brace of courtesans,
But meditating with two deep divines;
Not sleeping, to engross his idle body,
But praying, to enrich his watchful soul.
Happy were England would this virtuous prince
Take on his Grace the sovereignty thereof.
But sure I fear we shall not win him to it.
Marry, God defend his Grace should say us nay.
Now, Catesby, what says his Grace?
He wonders to what end you have assembled
Such troops of citizens to come to him,
His Grace not being warned thereof before.
He fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.
Sorry I am my noble cousin should
Suspect me that I mean no good to him.
By heaven, we come to him in perfect love,
And so once more return and tell his Grace.
When holy and devout religious men
Are at their beads, 'tis much to draw them thence,
So sweet is zealous contemplation.
See where his Grace stands, 'tween two clergymen.
Two props of virtue for a Christian prince,
To stay him from the fall of vanity;
And, see, a book of prayer in his hand,
True ornaments to know a holy man.--
Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince,
Lend favorable ear to our requests,
And pardon us the interruption
Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.
My lord, there needs no such apology.
Who, earnest in the service of my God,
Deferred the visitation of my friends.
But, leaving this, what is your Grace's pleasure?
Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above
And all good men of this ungoverned isle.
That seems disgracious in the city's eye,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
You have, my lord. Would it might please your
Grace,
On our entreaties, to amend your fault.
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?
Know, then, it is your fault that you resign
The supreme seat, the throne majestical,
The sceptered office of your ancestors,
Your state of fortune, and your due of birth,
The lineal glory of your royal house,
To the corruption of a blemished stock,
Whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,
Which here we waken to our country's good,
The noble isle doth want her proper limbs--
Her face defaced with scars of infamy,
Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants,
And almost shouldered in the swallowing gulf
Of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion;
Which to recure, we heartily solicit
Your gracious self to take on you the charge
And kingly government of this your land,
Not as Protector, steward, substitute,
Or lowly factor for another's gain,
But as successively, from blood to blood,
Your right of birth, your empery, your own.
For this, consorted with the citizens,
Your very worshipful and loving friends,
And by their vehement instigation,
In this just cause come I to move your Grace.
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof
Best fitteth my degree or your condition.
If not to answer, you might haply think
Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded
To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,
Which fondly you would here impose on me.
If to reprove you for this suit of yours,
So seasoned with your faithful love to me,
Then on the other side I checked my friends.
Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first,
And then, in speaking, not to incur the last,
Definitively thus I answer you:
Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert
Unmeritable shuns your high request.
First, if all obstacles were cut away
And that my path were even to the crown
As the ripe revenue and due of birth,
Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,
So mighty and so many my defects,
That I would rather hide me from my greatness,
Being a bark to brook no mighty sea,
Than in my greatness covet to be hid
And in the vapor of my glory smothered.
But, God be thanked, there is no need of me,
And much I need to help you, were there need.
The royal tree hath left us royal fruit,
Which, mellowed by the stealing hours of time,
Will well become the seat of majesty,
And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.
On him I lay that you would lay on me,
The right and fortune of his happy stars,
Which God defend that I should wring from him.
My lord, this argues conscience in your Grace,
But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,
All circumstances well considered.
You say that Edward is your brother's son;
So say we too, but not by Edward's wife.
For first was he contract to Lady Lucy--
Your mother lives a witness to his vow--
And afterward by substitute betrothed
To Bona, sister to the King of France.
These both put off, a poor petitioner,
Even in the afternoon of her best days,
Made prize and purchase of his wanton eye,
Seduced the pitch and height of his degree
To base declension and loathed bigamy.
By her in his unlawful bed he got
This Edward, whom our manners call "the Prince."
More bitterly could I expostulate,
Save that, for reverence to some alive,
Then, good my lord, take to your royal self
This proffered benefit of dignity,
If not to bless us and the land withal,
Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry
From the corruption of abusing times
Unto a lineal, true-derived course.
Do, good my lord. Your citizens entreat you.
Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffered love.
Alas, why would you heap this care on me?
If you refuse it, as in love and zeal
Loath to depose the child, your brother's son--
As well we know your tenderness of heart
And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,
Which we have noted in you to your kindred
And equally indeed to all estates--
Yet know, whe'er you accept our suit or no,
Your brother's son shall never reign our king,
But we will plant some other in the throne,
To the disgrace and downfall of your house.
And in this resolution here we leave you.--
Come, citizens. Zounds, I'll entreat no more.
Call him again, sweet prince. Accept their suit.
If you deny them, all the land will rue it.
Will you enforce me to a world of cares?
Call them again. I am not made of stones,
But penetrable to your kind entreaties,
Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
Cousin of Buckingham and sage, grave men,
Since you will buckle Fortune on my back,
To bear her burden, whe'er I will or no,
But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach
Attend the sequel of your imposition,
Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and stains thereof,
For God doth know, and you may partly see,
How far I am from the desire of this.
God bless your Grace! We see it and will say it.
In saying so, you shall but say the truth.
Then I salute you with this royal title:
Long live Richard, England's worthy king!
Tomorrow may it please you to be crowned?
Even when you please, for you will have it so.
Tomorrow, then, we will attend your Grace,
And so most joyfully we take our leave.
Come, let us to our holy work again.--
Farewell, my cousin. Farewell, gentle friends.
Duchess of Gloucester with Clarence's daughter, at
Who meets us here? My niece Plantagenet
Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester?
Now, for my life, she's wandering to the Tower,
On pure heart's love, to greet the tender prince.--
Daughter, well met.
As much to you, good sister. Whither away?
No farther than the Tower, and, as I guess,
Upon the like devotion as yourselves,
To gratulate the gentle princes there.
Kind sister, thanks. We'll enter all together.
And in good time here the Lieutenant comes.--
Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,
How doth the Prince and my young son of York?
Right well, dear madam. By your patience,
The King hath strictly charged the contrary.
The King? Who's that?
The Lord protect him from that kingly title!
Hath he set bounds between their love and me?
Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother.
Then bring me to their sights. I'll bear thy blame
And take thy office from thee, on my peril.
No, madam, no. I may not leave it so.
Let me but meet you ladies one hour hence,
And I'll salute your Grace of York as mother
And reverend looker-on of two fair queens.
Westminster,
There to be crowned Richard's royal queen.
That my pent heart may have some scope to beat,
Or else I swoon with this dead-killing news!
Despiteful tidings! O, unpleasing news!
Be of good cheer, mother. How fares your Grace?
Death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels.
Thy mother's name is ominous to children.
If thou wilt outstrip death, go, cross the seas,
And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell.
Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughterhouse,
Lest thou increase the number of the dead
And make me die the thrall of Margaret's curse,
Nor mother, wife, nor England's counted queen.
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.
You shall have letters from me to my son
In your behalf, to meet you on the way.
Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.
Whose unavoided eye is murderous.
Come, madam, come. I in all haste was sent.
And I with all unwillingness will go.
Of golden metal that must round my brow
Were red-hot steel to sear me to the brains!
Anointed let me be with deadly venom,
And die ere men can say "God save the Queen."
Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory.
To feed my humor, wish thyself no harm.
No? Why? When he that is my husband now
Came to me as I followed Henry's corse,
When scarce the blood was well washed from his
Which issued from my other angel husband
And that dear saint which then I weeping followed--
This was my wish: be thou, quoth I, accursed
For making me, so young, so old a widow;
And, when thou wedd'st, let sorrow haunt thy bed;
And be thy wife, if any be so mad,
More miserable by the life of thee
Than thou hast made me by my dear lord's death.
Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again,
Within so small a time my woman's heart
Grossly grew captive to his honey words
And proved the subject of mine own soul's curse,
Which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest,
For never yet one hour in his bed
Did I enjoy the golden dew of sleep,
But with his timorous dreams was still awaked.
Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick,
And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.
Poor heart, adieu. I pity thy complaining.
No more than with my soul I mourn for yours.
Farewell, thou woeful welcomer of glory.
Adieu, poor soul that tak'st thy leave of it.
Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee.
Eighty-odd years of sorrow have I seen,
And each hour's joy wracked with a week of teen.
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.--
Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes
Whom envy hath immured within your walls--
Rough cradle for such little pretty ones.
Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow
For tender princes, use my babies well.
So foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell.
Catesby, Ratcliffe, Lovell, and others, including a Page.]
Stand all apart.--Cousin of Buckingham.
Give me thy hand.
Thus high, by thy advice
And thy assistance is King Richard seated.
But shall we wear these glories for a day,
Or shall they last and we rejoice in them?
Still live they, and forever let them last.
Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch,
To try if thou be current gold indeed:
Young Edward lives; think now what I would speak.
Why, Buckingham, I say I would be king.
Why so you are, my thrice-renowned lord.
Ha! Am I king? 'Tis so--but Edward lives.
True, noble prince.
That Edward still should live "true noble prince"!
Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull.
Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead,
And I would have it suddenly performed.
What sayst thou now? Speak suddenly. Be brief.
Tut, tut, thou art all ice; thy kindness freezes.
Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?
Give me some little breath, some pause, dear lord,
Before I positively speak in this.
The King is angry. See, he gnaws his lip.
And unrespective boys. None are for me
That look into me with considerate eyes.
High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.--
Boy!
Know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold
Will tempt unto a close exploit of death?
Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit.
Gold were as good as twenty orators,
And will, no doubt, tempt him to anything.
What is his name?
No more shall be the neighbor to my counsels.
Hath he so long held out with me, untired,
And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.
How now, Lord Stanley, what's the news?
The Marquess Dorset, as I hear, is fled
To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.
Come hither, Catesby. Rumor it abroad
That Anne my wife is very grievous sick.
Inquire me out some mean poor gentleman,
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter.
The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.
Look how thou dream'st! I say again, give out
That Anne my queen is sick and like to die.
About it, for it stands me much upon
To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.
Murder her brothers, and then marry her--
Uncertain way of gain. But I am in
So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin.
Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
Is thy name Tyrrel?
James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
Art thou indeed?
Dar'st thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
Please you. But I had rather kill two enemies.
Why then, thou hast it. Two deep enemies,
Foes to my rest, and my sweet sleep's disturbers,
Are they that I would have thee deal upon.
Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.
Let me have open means to come to them,
And soon I'll rid you from the fear of them.
Thou sing'st sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel.
Go, by this token. Rise, and lend thine ear.
There is no more but so. Say it is done,
And I will love thee and prefer thee for it.
My lord, I have considered in my mind
The late request that you did sound me in.
Well, let that rest. Dorset is fled to Richmond.
Stanley, he is your wife's son. Well, look unto it.
My lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise,
For which your honor and your faith is pawned--
Th' earldom of Hereford and the movables
Which you have promised I shall possess.
Stanley, look to your wife. If she convey
Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.
What says your Highness to my just request?
Did prophesy that Richmond should be king,
When Richmond was a little peevish boy.
How chance the prophet could not at that time
Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him?
My lord, your promise for the earldom--
Richmond! When last I was at Exeter,
The Mayor in courtesy showed me the castle
And called it Rougemont, at which name I started,
Because a bard of Ireland told me once
Of what you promised me.
Because that, like a jack, thou keep'st the stroke
Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.
Why then, resolve me whether you will or no.
Thou troublest me; I am not in the vein.
And is it thus? Repays he my deep service
With such contempt? Made I him king for this?
To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on!
The tyrannous and bloody act is done,
The most arch deed of piteous massacre
That ever yet this land was guilty of.
Dighton and Forrest, who I did suborn
To do this piece of ruthless butchery,
Albeit they were fleshed villains, bloody dogs,
Melted with tenderness and mild compassion,
Wept like two children in their deaths' sad story.
Within their alabaster innocent arms.
Their lips were four red roses on a stalk,
And in their summer beauty kissed each other.
Which once," quoth Forrest, "almost changed my
But, O, the devil--" There the villain stopped;
When Dighton thus told on: "We smothered
The most replenished sweet work of nature
That from the prime creation e'er she framed."
Hence both are gone with conscience and remorse;
They could not speak; and so I left them both
To bear this tidings to the bloody king.
And here he comes.--All health, my sovereign lord.
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?
If to have done the thing you gave in charge
Beget your happiness, be happy then,
For it is done.
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them,
But where, to say the truth, I do not know.
Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after-supper,
When thou shalt tell the process of their death.
Meantime, but think how I may do thee good,
And be inheritor of thy desire.
Farewell till then.
The son of Clarence have I pent up close,
His daughter meanly have I matched in marriage,
The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom,
And Anne my wife hath bid this world goodnight.
Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims
At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter,
And by that knot looks proudly on the crown,
To her go I, a jolly thriving wooer.
Good or bad news, that thou com'st in so bluntly?
Bad news, my lord. Morton is fled to Richmond,
And Buckingham, backed with the hardy Welshmen,
Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
Ely with Richmond troubles me more near
Than Buckingham and his rash-levied strength.
Come, I have learned that fearful commenting
Is leaden servitor to dull delay;
Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary;
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king.
Go, muster men. My counsel is my shield.
We must be brief when traitors brave the field.
So now prosperity begins to mellow
And drop into the rotten mouth of death.
Here in these confines slyly have I lurked
To watch the waning of mine enemies.
And will to France, hoping the consequence
Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.
Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret. Who comes
Ah, my poor princes! Ah, my tender babes,
My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets,
If yet your gentle souls fly in the air
And be not fixed in doom perpetual,
Hover about me with your airy wings
And hear your mother's lamentation.
Hover about her; say that right for right
Hath dimmed your infant morn to aged night.
So many miseries have crazed my voice
That my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute.
Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet;
Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs
And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.
Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost,
Woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life
Brief abstract and record of tedious days,
Rest thy unrest on England's lawful earth,
Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.
Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave
As thou canst yield a melancholy seat,
Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.
Ah, who hath any cause to mourn but we?
If ancient sorrow be most reverend,
Give mine the benefit of seigniory,
And let my griefs frown on the upper hand.
If sorrow can admit society,
Tell over your woes again by viewing mine.
Thou hadst an Edward till a Richard killed him;
Thou hadst a Richard till a Richard killed him.
Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard killed him.
From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept
That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,
To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood;
That excellent grand tyrant of the Earth,
That reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls;
That foul defacer of God's handiwork
Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves.
How do I thank thee that this carnal cur
Preys on the issue of his mother's body
And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!
God witness with me, I have wept for thine.
Bear with me. I am hungry for revenge,
And now I cloy me with beholding it.
Thy Edward he is dead, that killed my Edward,
Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;
Young York, he is but boot, because both they
Matched not the high perfection of my loss.
Thy Clarence he is dead that stabbed my Edward,
And the beholders of this frantic play,
Th' adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
Untimely smothered in their dusky graves.
Richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer,
Only reserved their factor to buy souls
And send them thither. But at hand, at hand
Ensues his piteous and unpitied end.
Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray,
To have him suddenly conveyed from hence.
Cancel his bond of life, dear God I pray,
That I may live and say "The dog is dead."
That I should wish for thee to help me curse
That bottled spider, that foul bunch-backed toad!
The presentation of but what I was,
The flattering index of a direful pageant,
One heaved a-high to be hurled down below,
To be the aim of every dangerous shot,
Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers?
Where are thy two sons? Wherein dost thou joy?
Who sues and kneels and says "God save the
Queen?"
Where be the bending peers that flattered thee?
Where be the thronging troops that followed thee?
Decline all this, and see what now thou art:
For happy wife, a most distressed widow;
For joyful mother, one that wails the name;
For one being sued to, one that humbly sues;
For queen, a very caitiff crowned with care;
For she that scorned at me, now scorned of me;
For she being feared of all, now fearing one;
For she commanding all, obeyed of none.
Thus hath the course of justice whirled about
And left thee but a very prey to time,
Having no more but thought of what thou wast
To torture thee the more, being what thou art.
Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not
Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
Now thy proud neck bears half my burdened yoke,
From which even here I slip my weary head
And leave the burden of it all on thee.
Farewell, York's wife, and queen of sad mischance.
These English woes shall make me smile in France.
And teach me how to curse mine enemies.
Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days;
Compare dead happiness with living woe;
Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were,
And he that slew them fouler than he is.
Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse.
Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.
My words are dull. O, quicken them with thine!
Thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like
Why should calamity be full of words?
Windy attorneys to their clients' woes,
Airy succeeders of intestate joys,
Poor breathing orators of miseries,
Let them have scope; though what they will impart
Help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart.
If so, then be not tongue-tied. Go with me,
And in the breath of bitter words let's smother
My damned son that thy two sweet sons smothered.
Who intercepts me in my expedition?
By strangling thee in her accursed womb,
From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done.
Hid'st thou that forehead with a golden crown
Where should be branded, if that right were right,
The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown
And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers?
Tell me, thou villain-slave, where are my children?
Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence,
And little Ned Plantagenet his son?
Where is the gentle Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?
Let not the heavens hear these telltale women
Rail on the Lord's anointed. Strike, I say!
Either be patient and entreat me fair,
Or with the clamorous report of war
Thus will I drown your exclamations.
Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.
Then patiently hear my impatience.
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,
That cannot brook the accent of reproof.
And brief, good mother, for I am in haste.
Art thou so hasty? I have stayed for thee,
God knows, in torment and in agony.
And came I not at last to comfort you?
No, by the Holy Rood, thou know'st it well.
Thou cam'st on Earth to make the Earth my hell.
Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy;
Thy school days frightful, desp'rate, wild, and
Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous;
Thy age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody,
More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred.
What comfortable hour canst thou name,
That ever graced me with thy company?
Faith, none but Humfrey Hower, that called your
Grace
To breakfast once, forth of my company.
If I be so disgracious in your eye,
Let me march on and not offend you, madam.--
Strike up the drum.
You speak too bitterly.
For I shall never speak to thee again.
Either thou wilt die by God's just ordinance
Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror,
Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish
And nevermore behold thy face again.
Therefore take with thee my most grievous curse,
Which in the day of battle tire thee more
Than all the complete armor that thou wear'st.
My prayers on the adverse party fight,
And there the little souls of Edward's children
Whisper the spirits of thine enemies
And promise them success and victory.
Bloody thou art; bloody will be thy end.
Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.
Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to
Abides in me. I say amen to her.
Stay, madam. I must talk a word with you.
For thee to slaughter. For my daughters, Richard,
They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens,
And therefore level not to hit their lives.
You have a daughter called Elizabeth,
Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.
And must she die for this? O, let her live,
And I'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty,
Slander myself as false to Edward's bed,
Throw over her the veil of infamy.
So she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter,
Wrong not her birth. She is a royal princess.
To save her life, I'll say she is not so.
Her life is safest only in her birth.
And only in that safety died her brothers.
Lo, at their birth good stars were opposite.
No, to their lives ill friends were contrary.
All unavoided is the doom of destiny.
True, when avoided grace makes destiny.
My babes were destined to a fairer death
If grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.
You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.
Cousins, indeed, and by their uncle cozened
Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.
Whose hand soever launched their tender hearts,
Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction.
No doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt
Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,
To revel in the entrails of my lambs.
But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame,
My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys
Till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes,
And I, in such a desp'rate bay of death,
Like a poor bark of sails and tackling reft,
Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise
And dangerous success of bloody wars
As I intend more good to you and yours
Than ever you or yours by me were harmed!
What good is covered with the face of heaven,
To be discovered, that can do me good?
Th' advancement of your children, gentle lady.
Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads.
Unto the dignity and height of fortune,
The high imperial type of this Earth's glory.
Flatter my sorrow with report of it.
Tell me what state, what dignity, what honor,
Canst thou demise to any child of mine?
Even all I have--ay, and myself and all--
Will I withal endow a child of thine;
So in the Lethe of thy angry soul
Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs
Which thou supposest I have done to thee.
Be brief, lest that the process of thy kindness
Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.
Then know that from my soul I love thy daughter.
My daughter's mother thinks it with her soul.
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul.
So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers,
And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it.
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning.
And do intend to make her Queen of England.
Well then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?
Even he that makes her queen. Who else should be?
What, thou?
How canst thou woo her?
As one being best acquainted with her humor.
Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers,
Therefore present to her--as sometime Margaret
Did to thy father, steeped in Rutland's blood--
The purple sap from her sweet brother's body,
And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal.
If this inducement move her not to love,
Send her a letter of thy noble deeds;
Tell her thou mad'st away her uncle Clarence,
Her uncle Rivers, ay, and for her sake
Mad'st quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.
You mock me, madam. This is not the way
To win your daughter.
Unless thou couldst put on some other shape
And not be Richard, that hath done all this.
Say that I did all this for love of her.
Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,
Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
Look what is done cannot be now amended.
Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
Which after-hours gives leisure to repent.
If I did take the kingdom from your sons,
To make amends I'll give it to your daughter.
If I have killed the issue of your womb,
To quicken your increase I will beget
Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter.
Than is the doting title of a mother.
They are as children but one step below,
Even of your metal, of your very blood,
Of all one pain, save for a night of groans
Endured of her for whom you bid like sorrow.
Your children were vexation to your youth,
But mine shall be a comfort to your age.
The loss you have is but a son being king,
And by that loss your daughter is made queen.
Therefore accept such kindness as I can.
Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul
Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,
This fair alliance quickly shall call home
To high promotions and great dignity.
The king that calls your beauteous daughter wife
Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother.
Again shall you be mother to a king,
And all the ruins of distressful times
Repaired with double riches of content.
What, we have many goodly days to see!
The liquid drops of tears that you have shed
Shall come again, transformed to orient pearl,
Advantaging their love with interest
Of ten times double gain of happiness.
Go then, my mother; to thy daughter go.
Make bold her bashful years with your experience;
Prepare her ears to hear a wooer's tale;
Put in her tender heart th' aspiring flame
Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the Princess
With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys;
And when this arm of mine hath chastised
The petty rebel, dull-brained Buckingham,
Bound with triumphant garlands will I come
And lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed,
To whom I will retail my conquest won,
And she shall be sole victoress, Caesar's Caesar.
What were I best to say? Her father's brother
Would be her lord? Or shall I say her uncle?
Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
Under what title shall I woo for thee,
That God, the law, my honor, and her love
Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
Infer fair England's peace by this alliance.
Which she shall purchase with still-lasting war.
Tell her the King, that may command, entreats--
That, at her hands, which the King's King forbids.
Say she shall be a high and mighty queen.
To vail the title, as her mother doth.
Say I will love her everlastingly.
But how long shall that title "ever" last?
Sweetly in force unto her fair life's end.
But how long fairly shall her sweet life last?
As long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
As long as hell and Richard likes of it.
Say I, her sovereign, am her subject low.
But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.
Then plainly to her tell my loving tale.
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.
Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.
Now by my George, my Garter, and my crown--
Profaned, dishonored, and the third usurped.
Thy George, profaned, hath lost his lordly honor;
Thy Garter, blemished, pawned his knightly virtue;
Thy crown, usurped, disgraced his kingly glory.
If something thou wouldst swear to be believed,
Swear then by something that thou hast not
Then, by myself--
Now, by the world--
My father's death--
Why then, by God.
If thou didst fear to break an oath with Him,
The unity the King my husband made
Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died.
If thou hadst feared to break an oath by Him,
Th' imperial metal circling now thy head
Had graced the tender temples of my child,
And both the Princes had been breathing here,
Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust,
Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms.
What canst thou swear by now?
That thou hast wronged in the time o'erpast;
For I myself have many tears to wash
Hereafter time, for time past wronged by thee.
The children live whose fathers thou hast
Ungoverned youth, to wail it in their age;
The parents live whose children thou hast
Old barren plants, to wail it with their age.
Swear not by time to come, for that thou hast
Misused ere used, by times ill-used o'erpast.
As I intend to prosper and repent,
So thrive I in my dangerous affairs
Of hostile arms! Myself myself confound,
Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours,
Day, yield me not thy light, nor night thy rest,
Be opposite all planets of good luck
To my proceeding if, with dear heart's love,
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
In her consists my happiness and thine.
Without her follows to myself and thee,
Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul,
Death, desolation, ruin, and decay.
It cannot be avoided but by this;
It will not be avoided but by this.
Therefore, dear mother--I must call you so--
Be the attorney of my love to her;
Plead what I will be, not what I have been;
Not my deserts, but what I will deserve.
Urge the necessity and state of times,
And be not peevish found in great designs.
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.
Shall I forget myself to be myself?
Ay, if your self's remembrance wrong yourself.
But in your daughter's womb I bury them,
Where, in that nest of spicery, they will breed
Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
And be a happy mother by the deed.
And you shall understand from me her mind.
Bear her my true love's kiss; and so, farewell.
Relenting fool and shallow, changing woman!
How now, what news?
Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast
Rideth a puissant navy. To our shores
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
Unarmed and unresolved to beat them back.
And there they hull, expecting but the aid
Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.
Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of
Norfolk--
Ratcliffe thyself, or Catesby. Where is he?
Here, my good lord.
Ratcliffe, come hither. Post to Salisbury.When thou com'st thither-- Dull,
Why stay'st thou here and go'st not to the Duke?
First, mighty liege, tell me your Highness' pleasure,
What from your Grace I shall deliver to him.
The greatest strength and power that he can make
And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.
What, may it please you, shall I do at Salisbury?
Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?
Your Highness told me I should post before.
My mind is changed.
Stanley, what news with you?
None good, my liege, to please you with the hearing,
Nor none so bad but well may be reported.
Hoyday, a riddle! Neither good nor bad.
What need'st thou run so many miles about
When thou mayst tell thy tale the nearest way?
Once more, what news?
There let him sink, and be the seas on him!
White-livered runagate, what doth he there?
Stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,
He makes for England, here to claim the crown.
Is the chair empty? Is the sword unswayed?
Is the King dead, the empire unpossessed?
What heir of York is there alive but we?
And who is England's king but great York's heir?
Then tell me, what makes he upon the seas?
Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.
Unless for that he comes to be your liege,
You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.
Thou wilt revolt and fly to him, I fear.
No, my good lord. Therefore mistrust me not.
Where is thy power, then, to beat him back?
Where be thy tenants and thy followers?
Are they not now upon the western shore,
Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships?
No, my good lord. My friends are in the north.
Cold friends to me. What do they in the north
When they should serve their sovereign in the west?
They have not been commanded, mighty king.
Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave,
Where and what time your Majesty shall please.
Ay, thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond,
But I'll not trust thee.
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful.
Go then and muster men, but leave behind
Your son George Stanley. Look your heart be firm,
Or else his head's assurance is but frail.
So deal with him as I prove true to you.
My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire,
As I by friends am well advertised,
Sir Edward Courtney and the haughty prelate,
Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother,
With many more confederates are in arms.
In Kent, my liege, the Guilfords are in arms,
And every hour more competitors
Flock to the rebels, and their power grows strong.
My lord, the army of great Buckingham--
Out on you, owls! Nothing but songs of death.
There, take thou that till thou bring better news.
The news I have to tell your Majesty
Is that by sudden floods and fall of waters
Buckingham's army is dispersed and scattered,
And he himself wandered away alone,
No man knows whither.
There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.
Hath any well-advised friend proclaimed
Reward to him that brings the traitor in?
Such proclamation hath been made, my lord.
Sir Thomas Lovell and Lord Marquess Dorset,
But this good comfort bring I to your Highness:
The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest.
Richmond, in Dorsetshire, sent out a boat
Unto the shore to ask those on the banks
If they were his assistants, yea, or no--
Who answered him they came from Buckingham
Upon his party. He, mistrusting them,
Hoised sail and made his course again for Brittany.
March on, march on, since we are up in arms,
If not to fight with foreign enemies,
Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.
My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken.
That is the best news. That the Earl of Richmond
Is with a mighty power landed at Milford
Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
Away towards Salisbury! While we reason here,
Someone take order Buckingham be brought
To Salisbury. The rest march on with me.
Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
That in the sty of the most deadly boar
My son George Stanley is franked up in hold;
If I revolt, off goes young George's head;
The fear of that holds off my present aid.
So get thee gone. Commend me to thy lord.
Withal, say that the Queen hath heartily consented
He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
But tell me, where is princely Richmond now?
At Pembroke, or at Ha'rfordwest in Wales.
Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier;
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley,
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,
And Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant crew,
And many other of great name and worth;
And towards London do they bend their power,
If by the way they be not fought withal.
Well, hie thee to thy lord. I kiss his hand.
My letter will resolve him of my mind.
Farewell.
Will not King Richard let me speak with him?
No, my good lord. Therefore be patient.
Hastings and Edward's children, Grey and Rivers,
Holy King Henry and thy fair son Edward,
Vaughan, and all that have miscarried
By underhand, corrupted, foul injustice,
If that your moody, discontented souls
Do through the clouds behold this present hour,
Even for revenge mock my destruction.--
This is All Souls' Day, fellow, is it not?
Why, then, All Souls' Day is my body's doomsday.
This is the day which, in King Edward's time,
False to his children and his wife's allies.
This is the day wherein I wished to fall
By the false faith of him whom most I trusted.
This, this All Souls' Day to my fearful soul
Is the determined respite of my wrongs.
That high All-seer which I dallied with
Hath turned my feigned prayer on my head
And given in earnest what I begged in jest.
Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men
To turn their own points in their masters' bosoms.
Thus Margaret's curse falls heavy on my neck:
Remember Margaret was a prophetess."--
Come, lead me, officers, to the block of shame.
Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,
Bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny,
Thus far into the bowels of the land
Have we marched on without impediment,
And here receive we from our father Stanley
Lines of fair comfort and encouragement.
The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,
That spoiled your summer fields and fruitful vines,
Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his
In your embowelled bosoms--this foul swine
Is now even in the center of this isle,
Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn.
From Tamworth thither is but one day's march.
In God's name, cheerly on, courageous friends,
To reap the harvest of perpetual peace
By this one bloody trial of sharp war.
Every man's conscience is a thousand men
To fight against this guilty homicide.
He hath no friends but what are friends for fear,
Which in his dearest need will fly from him.
All for our vantage. Then, in God's name, march.
True hope is swift, and flies with swallow's wings;
Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
Here pitch our tent, even here in Bosworth field.
My lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
My lord of Norfolk--
Norfolk, we must have knocks, ha, must we not?
We must both give and take, my loving lord.
Up with my tent!--Here will I lie tonight.
But where tomorrow? Well, all's one for that.
Who hath descried the number of the traitors?
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
Why, our battalia trebles that account.
Besides, the King's name is a tower of strength
Which they upon the adverse faction want.--
Up with the tent!--Come, noble gentlemen,
Let us survey the vantage of the ground.
Call for some men of sound direction;
Let's lack no discipline, make no delay,
For, lords, tomorrow is a busy day.
Dorset, Herbert, Blunt, and others who set up
Richmond's tent.]
The weary sun hath made a golden set,
And by the bright track of his fiery car
Gives token of a goodly day tomorrow.--
Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.--
Give me some ink and paper in my tent;
Limit each leader to his several charge,
And part in just proportion our small power.--
My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon,
And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me.
The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment.--
Good Captain Blunt, bear my goodnight to him,
And by the second hour in the morning
Desire the Earl to see me in my tent.
Yet one thing more, good captain, do for me.
Where is Lord Stanley quartered, do you know?
Unless I have mista'en his colors much,
Which well I am assured I have not done,
His regiment lies half a mile, at least,
South from the mighty power of the King.
If without peril it be possible,
Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with
And give him from me this most needful note.
Upon my life, my lord, I'll undertake it,
And so God give you quiet rest tonight.
Good night, good Captain Blunt.	
Come, gentlemen,
Let us consult upon tomorrow's business.
Into my tent. The dew is raw and cold.
Catesby, with Soldiers.]
It's suppertime, my lord. It's nine o'clock.
What, is my beaver easier than it was,
And all my armor laid into my tent?
It is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.
Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge.
Use careful watch. Choose trusty sentinels.
Stir with the lark tomorrow, gentle Norfolk.
To Stanley's regiment. Bid him bring his power
Before sunrising, lest his son George fall
Into the blind cave of eternal night.	
Saddle white Surrey for the field tomorrow.
Look that my staves be sound and not too heavy.--
Ratcliffe.
Sawst thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?
Thomas the Earl of Surrey and himself,
Much about cockshut time, from troop to troop
Went through the army cheering up the soldiers.
So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine.
Nor cheer of mind that I was wont to have.
Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?
It is, my lord.
Ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my tent
And help to arm me. Leave me, I say.
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
All comfort that the dark night can afford
Be to thy person, noble father-in-law.
Tell me, how fares our loving mother?
Who prays continually for Richmond's good.
So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
And flaky darkness breaks within the east.
In brief, for so the season bids us be,
Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
And put thy fortune to the arbitrament
Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.
With best advantage will deceive the time
And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms.
But on thy side I may not be too forward,
Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,
Be executed in his father's sight.
Farewell. The leisure and the fearful time
Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
And ample interchange of sweet discourse,
Which so-long-sundered friends should dwell upon.
God give us leisure for these rites of love!
Once more, adieu. Be valiant and speed well.
Good lords, conduct him to his regiment.
Lest leaden slumber peise me down tomorrow
When I should mount with wings of victory.
Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
Look on my forces with a gracious eye.
Put in their hands Thy bruising irons of wrath,
That they may crush down with a heavy fall
The usurping helmets of our adversaries.
Make us Thy ministers of chastisement,
That we may praise Thee in the victory.
To Thee I do commend my watchful soul,
Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes.
Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still!	
Let me sit heavy on thy soul tomorrow.
Think how thou stabbed'st me in my prime of
At Tewkesbury. Despair therefore, and die!
Of butchered princes fight in thy behalf.
King Henry's issue, Richmond, comforts thee.
When I was mortal, my anointed body
By thee was punched full of deadly holes.
Think on the Tower and me. Despair and die!
Harry the Sixth bids thee despair and die.
Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king,
Doth comfort thee in thy sleep. Live and flourish.
Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,
Poor Clarence, by thy guile betrayed to death.
Tomorrow in the battle think on me,
And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair and die!
Lancaster,
The wronged heirs of York do pray for thee.
Good angels guard thy battle. Live and flourish.
Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,
Rivers, that died at Pomfret. Despair and die!
Think upon Grey, and let thy soul despair!
Think upon Vaughan, and with guilty fear
Let fall thy lance. Despair and die!
Awake, and think our wrongs in Richard's bosom
Will conquer him. Awake, and win the day.
Dream on thy cousins smothered in the Tower.
Let us be lead within thy bosom, Richard,
And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death.
Thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die.
Good angels guard thee from the boar's annoy.
Live, and beget a happy race of kings.
Edward's unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.
Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake,
And in a bloody battle end thy days.
Think on Lord Hastings. Despair and die!
Arm, fight, and conquer for fair England's sake.
Richard, thy wife, that wretched Anne thy wife,
That never slept a quiet hour with thee,
Now fills thy sleep with perturbations.
Tomorrow, in the battle, think on me,
And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair and die!
Dream of success and happy victory.
Thy adversary's wife doth pray for thee.	
The first was I that helped thee to the crown;
The last was I that felt thy tyranny.
And die in terror of thy guiltiness.
Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death.
Fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath.
But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed.
God and good angels fight on Richmond's side,
And Richard fall in height of all his pride.
Give me another horse! Bind up my wounds!
Have mercy, Jesu!--Soft, I did but dream.
The lights burn blue; it is now dead midnight.
Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
What do I fear? Myself? There's none else by.
Richard loves Richard, that is, I am I.
Is there a murderer here? No. Yes, I am.
Then fly! What, from myself? Great reason why:
Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself?
Alack, I love myself. Wherefore? For any good
That I myself have done unto myself?
For hateful deeds committed by myself.
Fool, of thyself speak well. Fool, do not flatter.
My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
And every tongue brings in a several tale,
And every tale condemns me for a villain.
Perjury, perjury, in the highest degree;
Murder, stern murder, in the direst degree;
All several sins, all used in each degree,
Throng to the bar, crying all "Guilty, guilty!"
And if I die no soul will pity me.
And wherefore should they, since that I myself
Find in myself no pity to myself?
Methought the souls of all that I had murdered
Came to my tent, and every one did threat
Tomorrow's vengeance on the head of Richard.
Ratcliffe, my lord, 'tis I. The early village cock
Hath twice done salutation to the morn.
Your friends are up and buckle on their armor.
What think'st thou, will our friends prove all true?
No doubt, my lord.
Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.
By the apostle Paul, shadows tonight
Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard
Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
Armed in proof and led by shallow Richmond.
Under our tents I'll play the eavesdropper
To see if any mean to shrink from me.
Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,
That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.
The sweetest sleep and fairest-boding dreams
That ever entered in a drowsy head
Have I since your departure had, my lords.
Methought their souls whose bodies Richard
Came to my tent and cried on victory.
In the remembrance of so fair a dream.
How far into the morning is it, lords?
Why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction.
His oration to his soldiers.
More than I have said, loving countrymen,
The leisure and enforcement of the time
Forbids to dwell upon. Yet remember this:
God, and our good cause, fight upon our side.
The prayers of holy saints and wronged souls,
Like high-reared bulwarks, stand before our faces.
Richard except, those whom we fight against
Had rather have us win than him they follow.
For what is he they follow? Truly, gentlemen,
One raised in blood, and one in blood established;
One that made means to come by what he hath,
And slaughtered those that were the means to help
Of England's chair, where he is falsely set;
One that hath ever been God's enemy.
Then if you fight against God's enemy,
God will, in justice, ward you as his soldiers.
If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,
You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain.
If you do fight against your country's foes,
Your country's fat shall pay your pains the hire.
If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors.
If you do free your children from the sword,
Your children's children quits it in your age.
Then, in the name of God and all these rights,
Advance your standards; draw your willing swords.
For me, the ransom of my bold attempt
Shall be this cold corpse on the Earth's cold face,
But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt
The least of you shall share his part thereof.
Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully.
God, and Saint George, Richmond, and victory!
What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?
That he was never trained up in arms.
He said the truth. And what said Surrey then?
He smiled and said "The better for our purpose."
He was in the right, and so indeed it is.
Tell the clock there. Give me a calendar.
Who saw the sun today?
Then he disdains to shine, for by the book
He should have braved the east an hour ago.
Ratcliffe!
My lord.
The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.
Not shine today? Why, what is that to me
More than to Richmond, for the selfsame heaven
That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.
Arm, arm, my lord. The foe vaunts in the field.
Come, bustle, bustle. Caparison my horse.--
Call up Lord Stanley; bid him bring his power.--
And thus my battle shall be ordered:
My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,
Consisting equally of horse and foot;
Our archers shall be placed in the midst.
John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,
Shall have the leading of this foot and horse.
They thus directed, we will follow
In the main battle, whose puissance on either side
Shall be well winged with our chiefest horse.
This, and Saint George to boot!--What think'st
This found I on my tent this morning.
Go, gentlemen, every man unto his charge.
Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls.
Conscience is but a word that cowards use,
Devised at first to keep the strong in awe.
Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law.
March on. Join bravely. Let us to it pell mell,
If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.
His oration to his army.
What shall I say more than I have inferred?
Remember whom you are to cope withal,
Whom their o'ercloyed country vomits forth
To desperate adventures and assured destruction.
You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest;
You having lands and blessed with beauteous wives,
They would restrain the one, distain the other.
And who doth lead them but a paltry fellow,
Long kept in Brittany at our mother's cost,
Felt so much cold as overshoes in snow?
Let's whip these stragglers o'er the seas again,
Lash hence these overweening rags of France,
These famished beggars weary of their lives,
Who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit,
For want of means, poor rats, had hanged
If we be conquered, let men conquer us,
And not these bastard Bretons, whom our fathers
Have in their own land beaten, bobbed, and
And in record left them the heirs of shame.
Shall these enjoy our lands, lie with our wives,
Ravish our daughters?	
Hark, I hear their drum.
Fight, gentlemen of England.--Fight, bold
Draw, archers; draw your arrows to the head.--
Spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood.
Amaze the welkin with your broken staves.--
What says Lord Stanley? Will he bring his power?
My lord, the enemy is past the marsh.
After the battle let George Stanley die.
Advance our standards. Set upon our foes.
Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,
Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons.
Upon them! Victory sits on our helms.
Catesby.]
Rescue, my lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue!
The King enacts more wonders than a man,
Daring an opposite to every danger.
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death.
Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost.
Withdraw, my lord. I'll help you to a horse.
Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,
And I will stand the hazard of the die.
Five have I slain today instead of him.
Richard is slain. Then retreat being sounded, Richmond
Richmond, Stanley, Earl of Derby, bearing the crown,
God and your arms be praised, victorious friends!
The day is ours; the bloody dog is dead.
Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee.
Lo, here this long-usurped royalty
From the dead temples of this bloody wretch
Have I plucked off, to grace thy brows withal.
Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
Great God of heaven, say amen to all!
But tell me, is young George Stanley living?
He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town,
Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
What men of name are slain on either side?
John, Duke of Norfolk, Walter, Lord Ferrers,
Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
Inter their bodies as becomes their births.
Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled
That in submission will return to us.
And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,
We will unite the white rose and the red;
Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction,
That long have frowned upon their enmity.
What traitor hears me and says not "Amen"?
England hath long been mad and scarred herself:
The brother blindly shed the brother's blood;
The father rashly slaughtered his own son;
The son, compelled, been butcher to the sire.
All this divided York and Lancaster,
Divided in their dire division.
The true succeeders of each royal house,
By God's fair ordinance conjoin together,
And let their heirs, God, if Thy will be so,
Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace,
With smiling plenty and fair prosperous days.
Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,
That would reduce these bloody days again
And make poor England weep in streams of blood.
Let them not live to taste this land's increase,
That would with treason wound this fair land's peace.
Now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again.
That she may long live here, God say amen.
New plays and maidenheads are near akin:
Much followed both, for both much money giv'n,
If they stand sound and well. And a good play,
Whose modest scenes blush on his marriage day
And shake to lose his honor, is like her
That after holy tie and first night's stir
Yet still is modesty, and still retains
More of the maid, to sight, than husband's pains.
We pray our play may be so, for I am sure
It has a noble breeder and a pure,
More famous yet 'twixt Po and silver Trent.
Chaucer, of all admired, the story gives;
There, constant to eternity, it lives.
If we let fall the nobleness of this,
And the first sound this child hear be a hiss,
How will it shake the bones of that good man
And make him cry from underground "O, fan
From me the witless chaff of such a writer
That blasts my bays and my famed works makes
Than Robin Hood!" This is the fear we bring;
For, to say truth, it were an endless thing
And too ambitious, to aspire to him,
Weak as we are, and, almost breathless, swim
In this deep water. Do but you hold out
Your helping hands, and we shall tack about
And something do to save us. You shall hear
Worth two hours' travel. To his bones sweet sleep;
Content to you. If this play do not keep
Our losses fall so thick we must needs leave.
After Hymen, a Nymph encompassed in her tresses,
The Song, sung by the Boy.
Hippolyta; the third before Emilia.]
For pity's sake and true gentility's,
Hear and respect me.
And as you wish your womb may thrive with fair
Hear and respect me.
Now for the love of him whom Jove hath marked
The honor of your bed, and for the sake
Of clear virginity, be advocate
For us and our distresses. This good deed
Shall raze you out o' th' book of trespasses
All you are set down there.
Sad lady, rise.
What woman I may stead that is distressed
Does bind me to her.
What's your request? Deliver you for all.
We are three queens whose sovereigns fell before
The wrath of cruel Creon; who endured
The beaks of ravens, talons of the kites,
And pecks of crows in the foul fields of Thebes.
He will not suffer us to burn their bones,
To urn their ashes, nor to take th' offense
Of mortal loathsomeness from the blest eye
Of holy Phoebus, but infects the winds
With stench of our slain lords. O, pity, duke!
Thou purger of the Earth, draw thy feared sword
That does good turns to th' world; give us the bones
Of our dead kings, that we may chapel them;
And of thy boundless goodness take some note
That for our crowned heads we have no roof
Save this, which is the lion's and the bear's,
And vault to everything.
Your knees to wrong themselves. I have heard the
Of your dead lords, which gives me such lamenting
As wakes my vengeance and revenge for 'em.
King Capaneus was your lord. The day
That he should marry you, at such a season
As now it is with me, I met your groom
By Mars's altar. You were that time fair--
Not Juno's mantle fairer than your tresses,
Nor in more bounty spread her. Your wheaten
Was then nor threshed nor blasted. Fortune at you
Dimpled her cheek with smiles. Hercules, our
Then weaker than your eyes, laid by his club;
He tumbled down upon his Nemean hide
And swore his sinews thawed. O grief and time,
Fearful consumers, you will all devour!
Some god hath put his mercy in your manhood,
Whereto he'll infuse power, and press you forth
Our undertaker.
Unto the helmeted Bellona use them
And pray for me, your soldier.	
Troubled I am.	
Most dreaded Amazonian, that hast slain
The scythe-tusked boar; that with thy arm, as strong
As it is white, wast near to make the male
To thy sex captive, but that this thy lord,
Born to uphold creation in that honor
First nature styled it in, shrunk thee into
The bound thou wast o'erflowing, at once subduing
Thy force and thy affection; soldieress
That equally canst poise sternness with pity,
Whom now I know hast much more power on him
Than ever he had on thee, who ow'st his strength
And his love too, who is a servant for
The tenor of thy speech, dear glass of ladies,
Bid him that we, whom flaming war doth scorch,
Under the shadow of his sword may cool us;
Require him he advance it o'er our heads;
Speak 't in a woman's key, like such a woman
As any of us three; weep ere you fail.
Lend us a knee;
But touch the ground for us no longer time
Than a dove's motion when the head's plucked off.
Tell him if he i' th' blood-sized field lay swoll'n,
Showing the sun his teeth, grinning at the moon,
What you would do.
As that whereto I am going, and never yet
Went I so willing way. My lord is taken
Heart-deep with your distress; let him consider.
Set down in ice, which by hot grief uncandied
Melts into drops; so sorrow, wanting form,
Is pressed with deeper matter.
Your grief is written in your cheek.
You cannot read it there.	
There through my tears,
Like wrinkled pebbles in a glassy stream,
You may behold 'em. Lady, lady, alack!
He that will all the treasure know o' th' Earth
Must know the center too; he that will fish
For my least minnow, let him lead his line
To catch one at my heart. O, pardon me!
Extremity, that sharpens sundry wits,
Makes me a fool.
Who cannot feel nor see the rain, being in 't,
Knows neither wet nor dry. If that you were
The groundpiece of some painter, I would buy you
Such heart-pierced demonstration. But, alas,
Being a natural sister of our sex,
Your sorrow beats so ardently upon me
That it shall make a counter-reflect 'gainst
My brother's heart and warm it to some pity,
Though it were made of stone. Pray have good
Forward to th' temple. Leave not out a jot
Will longer last and be more costly than
Your suppliants' war. Remember that your fame
Knolls in the ear o' th' world; what you do quickly
Is not done rashly; your first thought is more
Than others' labored meditance, your premeditating
More than their actions. But, O Jove, your actions,
Soon as they move, as ospreys do the fish,
Subdue before they touch. Think, dear duke, think
What beds our slain kings have!
That our dear lords have none!
Those that with cords, knives, drams, precipitance,
Weary of this world's light, have to themselves
Been death's most horrid agents, human grace
Affords them dust and shadow.
Lie blist'ring 'fore the visitating sun,
And were good kings when living.
It is true, and I will give you comfort
To give your dead lords graves;
The which to do must make some work with Creon.
And that work presents itself to th' doing.
Now 'twill take form; the heats are gone tomorrow.
Then, bootless toil must recompense itself
With its own sweat. Now he's secure,
Not dreams we stand before your puissance,
Rinsing our holy begging in our eyes
To make petition clear.
Drunk with his victory.
Of bread and sloth.
How to draw out, fit to this enterprise,
The prim'st for this proceeding, and the number
To carry such a business: forth and levy
Our worthiest instruments, whilst we dispatch
This grand act of our life, this daring deed
Of fate in wedlock.
Dowagers, take hands.
Let us be widows to our woes. Delay
Commends us to a famishing hope.
We come unseasonably; but when could grief
Cull forth, as unpanged judgment can, fitt'st time
For best solicitation?
This is a service whereto I am going
Greater than any was; it more imports me
Than all the actions that I have foregone,
Or futurely can cope.
Our suit shall be neglected when her arms,
Able to lock Jove from a synod, shall
By warranting moonlight corselet thee. O, when
Her twinning cherries shall their sweetness fall
Upon thy tasteful lips, what wilt thou think
Of rotten kings or blubbered queens? What care
For what thou feel'st not, what thou feel'st being
To make Mars spurn his drum? O, if thou couch
But one night with her, every hour in 't will
Take hostage of thee for a hundred, and
Thou shalt remember nothing more than what
That banquet bids thee to.
You should be so transported, as much sorry
Did I not, by th' abstaining of my joy--
Which breeds a deeper longing--cure their surfeit
That craves a present med'cine, I should pluck
All ladies' scandal on me.	
Therefore, sir,
As I shall here make trial of my prayers,
Either presuming them to have some force,
Or sentencing for aye their vigor dumb,
Prorogue this business we are going about, and
Your shield afore your heart--about that neck
Which is my fee, and which I freely lend
To do these poor queens service.
Our cause cries for your knee.
My sister her petition in that force,
With that celerity and nature which
She makes it in, from henceforth I'll not dare
To ask you anything, nor be so hardy
Ever to take a husband.
That which you kneel to have me.--Pirithous,
Lead on the bride; get you and pray the gods
For success and return; omit not anything
In the pretended celebration.--Queens,
Follow your soldier.  As before, hence
And at the banks of Aulis meet us with
The forces you can raise, where we shall find
The moiety of a number for a business
More bigger looked.	
Sweet, keep it as my token.--Set you forward,
For I will see you gone.
Farewell, my beauteous sister.--Pirithous,
Keep the feast full; bate not an hour on 't.
Shall want till your return.
Budge not from Athens. We shall be returning
Ere you can end this feast, of which I pray you
Make no abatement.--Once more, farewell all.
Thus dost thou still make good the tongue o' th'
And earn'st a deity equal with Mars.
Thou, being but mortal, makest affections bend
To godlike honors; they themselves, some say,
Groan under such a mast'ry.
Thus should we do; being sensually subdued,
We lose our human title. Good cheer, ladies.
Now turn we towards your comforts.
Dear Palamon, dearer in love than blood
And our prime cousin, yet unhardened in
The crimes of nature, let us leave the city
Thebes, and the temptings in 't, before we further
Sully our gloss of youth,
And here to keep in abstinence we shame
As in incontinence; for not to swim
At least to frustrate striving; and to follow
The common stream, 'twould bring us to an eddy
Where we should turn or drown; if labor through,
Our gain but life and weakness.
Is cried up with example. What strange ruins,
Since first we went to school, may we perceive
Walking in Thebes! Scars and bare weeds
The gain o' th' martialist, who did propound
To his bold ends honor and golden ingots,
Which though he won, he had not, and now flirted
By peace for whom he fought. Who then shall offer
To Mars's so-scorned altar? I do bleed
When such I meet, and wish great Juno would
Resume her ancient fit of jealousy
To get the soldier work, that peace might purge
For her repletion, and retain anew
Her charitable heart, now hard and harsher
Than strife or war could be.
Meet you no ruin but the soldier in
The cranks and turns of Thebes? You did begin
As if you met decays of many kinds.
Perceive you none that do arouse your pity
But th' unconsidered soldier?
Decays where'er I find them, but such most
That, sweating in an honorable toil,
Are paid with ice to cool 'em.
Of no respect in Thebes. I spake of Thebes--
How dangerous, if we will keep our honors,
It is for our residing, where every evil
Hath a good color; where every seeming good's
As they are here were to be strangers, and,
Such things to be, mere monsters.
Unless we fear that apes can tutor 's--to
Be masters of our manners. What need I
Affect another's gait, which is not catching
Where there is faith? Or to be fond upon
Another's way of speech, when by mine own
Speaking it truly? Why am I bound
By any generous bond to follow him
Follows his tailor, haply so long until
The followed make pursuit? Or let me know
Why mine own barber is unblessed, with him
My poor chin too, for 'tis not scissored just
To such a favorite's glass? What canon is there
That does command my rapier from my hip
To dangle 't in my hand, or to go tiptoe
Before the street be foul? Either I am
The forehorse in the team, or I am none
That draw i' th' sequent trace. These poor slight
Need not a plantain. That which rips my bosom
Almost to th' heart's--
Makes heaven unfeared and villainy assured
Beyond its power there's nothing; almost puts
Faith in a fever, and deifies alone
Voluble chance; who only attributes
The faculties of other instruments
To his own nerves and act; commands men service,
And what they win in 't, boot and glory; one
That fears not to do harm; good, dares not. Let
The blood of mine that's sib to him be sucked
From me with leeches; let them break and fall
Off me with that corruption.
Let's leave his court, that we may nothing share
Of his loud infamy; for our milk
Will relish of the pasture, and we must
Be vile or disobedient, not his kinsmen
In blood unless in quality.
The ears of heav'nly justice. Widows' cries
Descend again into their throats and have not
Due audience of the gods.
Valerius.
The King calls for you; yet be leaden-footed
Till his great rage be off him. Phoebus, when
He broke his whipstock and exclaimed against
The horses of the sun, but whispered to
The loudness of his fury.
But what's the matter?
Theseus, who where he threats appalls, hath sent
Deadly defiance to him and pronounces
Ruin to Thebes, who is at hand to seal
The promise of his wrath.
But that we fear the gods in him, he brings not
Thirds his own worth--the case is each of ours--
When that his action's dregged with mind assured
Our services stand now for Thebes, not Creon.
Yet to be neutral to him were dishonor,
Rebellious to oppose. Therefore we must
With him stand to the mercy of our fate,
Who hath bounded our last minute.
On fail of some condition?
The intelligence of state came in the instant
With the defier.
His enemy come in, the blood we venture
Should be as for our health, which were not spent,
Rather laid out for purchase. But alas,
Our hands advanced before our hearts, what will
The fall o' th' stroke do damage?
That never-erring arbitrator, tell us
When we know all ourselves, and let us follow
The becking of our chance.
No further.
To our great lord, of whose success I dare not
Make any timorous question; yet I wish him
Excess and overflow of power, an 't might be,
To dure ill-dealing fortune. Speed to him.
Store never hurts good governors.
His ocean needs not my poor drops, yet they
Must yield their tribute there.--My precious maid,
Those best affections that the heavens infuse
In their best-tempered pieces keep enthroned
In your dear heart!
To our all-royal brother, for whose speed
The great Bellona I'll solicit; and
Since in our terrene state petitions are not
Without gifts understood, I'll offer to her
What I shall be advised she likes. Our hearts
Are in his army, in his tent.
We have been soldiers, and we cannot weep
When our friends don their helms or put to sea,
Or tell of babes broached on the lance, or women
That have sod their infants in--and after ate them--
The brine they wept at killing 'em. Then if
You stay to see of us such spinsters, we
Should hold you here forever.
As I pursue this war, which shall be then
Beyond further requiring.	
Follows his friend! Since his depart, his sports,
Though craving seriousness and skill, passed slightly
His careless execution, where nor gain
Made him regard, or loss consider, but
Playing one business in his hand, another
Directing in his head, his mind nurse equal
To these so diff'ring twins. Have you observed him
Since our great lord departed?
And I did love him for 't. They two have cabined
In many as dangerous as poor a corner,
Peril and want contending; they have skiffed
Torrents whose roaring tyranny and power
Fought out together where Death's self was lodged.
Yet fate hath brought them off. Their knot of love,
Tied, weaved, entangled, with so true, so long,
And with a finger of so deep a cunning,
May be outworn, never undone. I think
Theseus cannot be umpire to himself,
Cleaving his conscience into twain and doing
Each side like justice, which he loves best.
There is a best, and reason has no manners
To say it is not you. I was acquainted
Once with a time when I enjoyed a playfellow;
You were at wars when she the grave enriched,
Who made too proud the bed; took leave o' th' moon,
Which then looked pale at parting, when our count
Was each eleven.
You talk of Pirithous' and Theseus' love.
Theirs has more ground, is more maturely seasoned,
More buckled with strong judgment, and their needs
The one of th' other may be said to water
Their intertangled roots of love. But I,
And she I sigh and spoke of, were things innocent,
Loved for we did, and like the elements
That know not what nor why, yet do effect
Rare issues by their operance, our souls
Did so to one another. What she liked
Was then of me approved, what not, condemned,
No more arraignment. The flower that I would pluck
And put between my breasts--O, then but beginning
To swell about the blossom--she would long
Till she had such another, and commit it
To the like innocent cradle, where, Phoenix-like,
They died in perfume. On my head no toy
But was her pattern; her affections--pretty,
Though haply hers careless were--I followed
For my most serious decking. Had mine ear
Stol'n some new air, or at adventure hummed one
From musical coinage, why, it was a note
Whereon her spirits would sojourn--rather, dwell
And sing it in her slumbers. This rehearsal--
Which fury-innocent wots well comes in
Like old importment's bastard--has this end,
That the true love 'tween maid and maid may be
More than in sex individual.
And this high-speeded pace is but to say
That you shall never--like the maid Flavina--
Love any that's called man.
Though in 't I know thou dost believe thyself--
Than I will trust a sickly appetite,
That loathes even as it longs. But sure, my sister,
If I were ripe for your persuasion, you
Have said enough to shake me from the arm
Of the all-noble Theseus, for whose fortunes
That we, more than his Pirithous, possess
The high throne in his heart.
Against your faith, yet I continue mine.
Flourish. Then enter, through one door, Theseus,
Entering through another door, the three Queens
To thee no star be dark!
Friend thee forever.
Be wished upon thy head, I cry "Amen" to 't!
Th' impartial gods, who from the mounted heavens
View us their mortal herd, behold who err
And, in their time, chastise. Go and find out
The bones of your dead lords and honor them
With treble ceremony; rather than a gap
Should be in their dear rites, we would supply 't;
But those we will depute which shall invest
You in your dignities and even each thing
Our haste does leave imperfect. So, adieu,
And heaven's good eyes look on you.	
What are those?
Men of great quality, as may be judged
By their appointment. Some of Thebes have told 's
They are sisters' children, nephews to the King.
By th' helm of Mars, I saw them in the war,
Like to a pair of lions, smeared with prey,
Make lanes in troops aghast. I fixed my note
Constantly on them, for they were a mark
Worth a god's view. What prisoner was 't that told me
When I enquired their names?
Arcite and Palamon.
They are not dead?
Nor in a state of life. Had they been taken
When their last hurts were given, 'twas possible
They might have been recovered. Yet they breathe
And have the name of men.
The very lees of such, millions of rates,
Exceed the wine of others. All our surgeons
Convent in their behoof; our richest balms,
Rather than niggard, waste. Their lives concern us
Much more than Thebes is worth. Rather than have
Freed of this plight, and in their morning state,
Sound and at liberty, I would 'em dead.
But forty-thousandfold we had rather have 'em
Prisoners to us than Death. Bear 'em speedily
From our kind air, to them unkind, and minister
What man to man may do--for our sake, more,
Since I have known frights, fury, friends' behests,
Love's provocations, zeal, a mistress' task,
Desire of liberty, a fever, madness,
Hath set a mark which nature could not reach to
Without some imposition, sickness in will
And great Apollo's mercy, all our best
Their best skill tender.--Lead into the city,
Where, having bound things scattered, we will post
To Athens 'fore our army.
The dirge.
This funeral path brings to your household's grave.
Joy seize on you again; peace sleep with him.
And this to yours.
This world's a city full of straying streets,
And death's the market-place where each one meets.
When that shall be seen, I tender my consent.
What the reason of it is, I know not. Look, yonder
How do you, noble cousin?
Why, strong enough to laugh at misery
And bear the chance of war; yet we are prisoners
And to that destiny have patiently
Laid up my hour to come.
Where is Thebes now? Where is our noble country?
Where are our friends and kindreds? Never more
Must we behold those comforts, never see
The hardy youths strive for the games of honor,
Hung with the painted favors of their ladies,
Like tall ships under sail; then start amongst 'em
And as an east wind leave 'em all behind us,
Like lazy clouds, whilst Palamon and Arcite,
Even in the wagging of a wanton leg,
Outstripped the people's praises, won the garlands
Ere they have time to wish 'em ours. O, never
Shall we two exercise, like twins of honor,
Our arms again, and feel our fiery horses
Like proud seas under us. Our good swords now--
Better the red-eyed god of war ne'er wore--
Ravished our sides, like age must run to rust
And deck the temples of those gods that hate us;
These hands shall never draw 'em out like lightning
To blast whole armies more.
Those hopes are prisoners with us. Here we are
And here the graces of our youths must wither
Like a too-timely spring. Here age must find us
And--which is heaviest, Palamon--unmarried.
The sweet embraces of a loving wife,
Loaden with kisses, armed with thousand Cupids,
Shall never clasp our necks; no issue know us--
No figures of ourselves shall we e'er see,
To glad our age, and like young eagles teach 'em
Boldly to gaze against bright arms and say
The fair-eyed maids shall weep our banishments
And in their songs curse ever-blinded Fortune
Till she for shame see what a wrong she has done
To youth and nature. This is all our world.
We shall know nothing here but one another,
Hear nothing but the clock that tells our woes.
The vine shall grow, but we shall never see it;
Summer shall come, and with her all delights,
But dead-cold winter must inhabit here still.
That shook the aged forest with their echoes
No more now must we halloo; no more shake
Our pointed javelins whilst the angry swine
Flies like a Parthian quiver from our rages,
Struck with our well-steeled darts. All valiant uses,
The food and nourishment of noble minds,
In us two here shall perish; we shall die,
Which is the curse of honor, lastly,
Children of grief and ignorance.
Even from the bottom of these miseries,
From all that fortune can inflict upon us,
If the gods please: to hold here a brave patience,
And the enjoying of our griefs together.
Whilst Palamon is with me, let me perish
If I think this our prison!
Were twined together. 'Tis most true, two souls
Put in two noble bodies, let 'em suffer
The gall of hazard, so they grow together,
Will never sink; they must not, say they could.
Shall we make worthy uses of this place
That all men hate so much?
Let's think this prison holy sanctuary
To keep us from corruption of worse men.
We are young and yet desire the ways of honor
That liberty and common conversation,
The poison of pure spirits, might like women
Woo us to wander from. What worthy blessing
Can be but our imaginations
May make it ours? And here being thus together,
We are an endless mine to one another;
We are one another's wife, ever begetting
New births of love; we are father, friends,
We are, in one another, families;
Is our inheritance; no hard oppressor
Dare take this from us; here with a little patience
We shall live long and loving. No surfeits seek us;
The hand of war hurts none here, nor the seas
Swallow their youth. Were we at liberty,
Quarrels consume us; envy of ill men
Crave our acquaintance. I might sicken, cousin,
Where you should never know it, and so perish
Without your noble hand to close mine eyes,
Or prayers to the gods. A thousand chances,
Were we from hence, would sever us.
With my captivity. What a misery
It is to live abroad and everywhere!
That woo the wills of men to vanity
To tell the world 'tis but a gaudy shadow
That old Time as he passes by takes with him.
What had we been, old in the court of Creon,
Where sin is justice, lust and ignorance
The virtues of the great ones? Cousin Arcite,
Had not the loving gods found this place for us,
We had died as they do, ill old men, unwept,
And had their epitaphs, the people's curses.
Shall I say more?
Is there record of any two that loved
Better than we do, Arcite?
Should ever leave us.
And after death our spirits shall be led
To those that love eternally.	
Speak on, sir.
This garden has a world of pleasures in 't.
What flower is this?
That was a fair boy certain, but a fool
To love himself. Were there not maids enough?
Pray, forward.
They could not be to one so fair.
But take heed to your kindness, though.
Men are mad things.
Canst not thou work such flowers in silk, wench?
This is pretty color. Will 't not do
Rarely upon a skirt, wench?
Cousin, cousin! How do you, sir? Why, Palamon!
Never till now I was in prison, Arcite.
Why, what's the matter, man?
By heaven, she is a goddess.
She is a goddess, Arcite.
Methinks a rose is best.
It is the very emblem of a maid.
For when the west wind courts her gently,
How modestly she blows and paints the sun
With her chaste blushes! When the north comes
Rude and impatient, then, like chastity,
She locks her beauties in her bud again,
And leaves him to base briers.
Sometimes her modesty will blow so far
She falls for 't. A maid,
If she have any honor, would be loath
To take example by her.
She is wondrous fair.
The sun grows high. Let's walk in. Keep these
We'll see how near art can come near their colors.
That's as we bargain, madam.
What think you of this beauty?
Is 't but a rare one?
Might not a man well lose himself and love her?
Beshrew mine eyes for 't! Now I feel my shackles.
You love her, then?
Before my liberty.
That's nothing.
As she is heavenly and a blessed goddess.
So both may love.
First with mine eye of all those beauties
In her revealed to mankind. If thou lov'st her,
Or entertain'st a hope to blast my wishes,
Thou art a traitor, Arcite, and a fellow
False as thy title to her. Friendship, blood,
And all the ties between us I disclaim
If thou once think upon her.
And, if the lives of all my name lay on it,
If that will lose you, farewell, Palamon.
And have as just a title to her beauty
As any Palamon or any living
That is a man's son.
Yes, and have found me so. Why are you moved
Let me deal coldly with you: am not I
Part of your blood, part of your soul? You have
That I was Palamon and you were Arcite.
Yes.
Those joys, griefs, angers, fears, my friend shall
You may be.
So strangely, so unlike a noble kinsman,
To love alone? Speak truly, do you think me
Unworthy of her sight?
If thou pursue that sight.
First sees the enemy, shall I stand still
And let mine honor down, and never charge?
Yes, if he be but one.
Had rather combat me?
And use thy freedom. Else, if thou pursuest her,
Be as that cursed man that hates his country,
Till thou art worthy, Arcite, it concerns me.
And in this madness if I hazard thee
And take thy life, I deal but truly.
You play the child extremely. I will love her;
And all this justly.
Thy false self and thy friend had but this fortune
To be one hour at liberty, and grasp
Our good swords in our hands, I would quickly
What 'twere to filch affection from another.
Thou art baser in it than a cutpurse.
Put but thy head out of this window more
And, as I have a soul, I'll nail thy life to 't.
Thou dar'st not, fool; thou canst not; thou art feeble.
Put my head out? I'll throw my body out
And leap the garden when I see her next,
And pitch between her arms to anger thee.
No more; the keeper's coming. I shall live
To knock thy brains out with my shackles.
By your leave, gentlemen.
Lord Arcite, you must presently to th' Duke;
The cause I know not yet.
Prince Palamon, I must awhile bereave you
Of your fair cousin's company.
Even when you please, of life.--Why is he sent for?
It may be he shall marry her; he's goodly,
And like enough the Duke hath taken notice
Both of his blood and body. But his falsehood!
Why should a friend be treacherous? If that
Get him a wife so noble and so fair,
Let honest men ne'er love again. Once more
And fruit and flowers more blessed that still
As her bright eyes shine on you, would I were,
For all the fortune of my life hereafter,
Yon little tree, yon blooming apricock!
How I would spread and fling my wanton arms
In at her window; I would bring her fruit
Fit for the gods to feed on; youth and pleasure
Still as she tasted should be doubled on her;
And, if she be not heavenly, I would make her
So near the gods in nature, they should fear her.
And then I am sure she would love me.--How now,
Where's Arcite?
Obtained his liberty, but never more
Upon his oath and life must he set foot
Upon this kingdom.
He shall see Thebes again, and call to arms
The bold young men that, when he bids 'em charge,
Fall on like fire. Arcite shall have a fortune,
If he dare make himself a worthy lover,
Yet in the field to strike a battle for her,
And, if he lose her then, he's a cold coward.
How bravely may he bear himself to win her
If he be noble Arcite--thousand ways!
Were I at liberty, I would do things
Of such a virtuous greatness that this lady,
This blushing virgin, should take manhood to her
And seek to ravish me.
No, but from this place to remove your Lordship;
The windows are too open.
That are so envious to me! Prithee, kill me.
And hang for 't afterward!
Had I a sword I would kill thee.
Thou bringst such pelting, scurvy news continually,
Thou art not worthy life. I will not go.
Indeed you must, my lord.
No.
There is no remedy.
May rude wind never hurt thee. O, my lady,
If ever thou hast felt what sorrow was,
Dream how I suffer.--Come; now bury me.
Banished the kingdom? 'Tis a benefit,
The free enjoying of that face I die for,
Beyond imagination--such a vengeance
That, were I old and wicked, all my sins
Could never pluck upon me. Palamon,
Thou hast the start now; thou shalt stay and see
Her bright eyes break each morning 'gainst thy
And let in life into thee; thou shalt feed
Upon the sweetness of a noble beauty
That nature ne'er exceeded nor ne'er shall.
Good gods, what happiness has Palamon!
Twenty to one he'll come to speak to her,
And if she be as gentle as she's fair,
Tempests and make the wild rocks wanton.
Come what can come,
The worst is death. I will not leave the kingdom.
And no redress there. If I go, he has her.
Or end my fortunes. Either way I am happy.
And you know what wenches, ha! But will the
Go to, the matter's too far driven between him and
Why, what a question's that?
To me that know not.
Where were you bred, you know it not?
Are there such games today?
And such as you never saw. The Duke himself
Will be in person there.
Wrestling and running.--'Tis a pretty fellow.
Thou wilt not go along?
Take your own time.--Come, boys.
This is an offered opportunity
The best men called it excellent--and run
Swifter than wind upon a field of corn,
Curling the wealthy ears, never flew. I'll venture,
And in some poor disguise be there. Who knows
Whether my brows may not be girt with garlands,
And happiness prefer me to a place
Where I may ever dwell in sight of her?
Why should I love this gentleman? 'Tis odds
He never will affect me. I am base,
My father the mean keeper of his prison,
And he a prince. To marry him is hopeless;
To be his whore is witless. Out upon 't!
What pushes are we wenches driven to
When fifteen once has found us! First, I saw him;
He has as much to please a woman in him,
If he please to bestow it so, as ever
These eyes yet looked on. Next, I pitied him,
And so would any young wench, o' my conscience,
That ever dreamed, or vowed her maidenhead
To a young handsome man. Then I loved him,
Extremely loved him, infinitely loved him!
And yet he had a cousin, fair as he too.
But in my heart was Palamon, and there,
Lord, what a coil he keeps! To hear him
Sing in an evening, what a heaven it is!
And yet his songs are sad ones. Fairer spoken
Was never gentleman. When I come in
To bring him water in a morning, first
He bows his noble body, then salutes me thus:
Get thee a happy husband." Once he kissed me;
Would he would do so ev'ry day! He grieves much--
And me as much to see his misery.
What should I do to make him know I love him?
For I would fain enjoy him. Say I ventured
To set him free? What says the law then?
Thus much for law or kindred! I will do it,
And this night, or tomorrow, he shall love me.
Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Pirithous, Emilia, Arcite
You have done worthily. I have not seen,
Since Hercules, a man of tougher sinews.
Whate'er you are, you run the best and wrestle
That these times can allow.
What country bred you?
Are you a gentleman?
And to those gentle uses gave me life.
Are you his heir?
Sure, is a happy sire, then. What proves you?
To a deep cry of dogs. I dare not praise
My feat in horsemanship, yet they that knew me
Would say it was my best piece. Last, and greatest,
Upon my soul, a proper man.
How do you like him, lady?
If he say true, of his sort.
His mother was a wondrous handsome woman;
His face, methinks, goes that way.
And fiery mind illustrate a brave father.
Mark how his virtue, like a hidden sun,
Breaks through his baser garments.
What made you seek this place, sir?
To purchase name and do my ablest service
To such a well-found wonder as thy worth;
For only in thy court, of all the world,
Dwells fair-eyed Honor.
Sir, we are much indebted to your travel,
Nor shall you lose your wish.--Pirithous,
Dispose of this fair gentleman.
Whate'er you are, you're mine, and I shall give you
To a most noble service: to this lady,
This bright young virgin.
Pray observe her goodness;
You have honored her fair birthday with your
And, as your due, you're hers. Kiss her fair hand, sir.
Sir, you're a noble giver.--Dearest beauty,
Thus let me seal my vowed faith.
When your servant,
Your most unworthy creature, but offends you,
Command him die, he shall.
If you deserve well, sir, I shall soon see 't.
You're mine, and somewhat better than your rank
You are a horseman, I must needs entreat you
This afternoon to ride--but 'tis a rough one.
Freeze in my saddle.
And you, Emilia,--and you, friend,--and all,
Tomorrow by the sun, to do observance
To flowery May in Dian's wood.--Wait well, sir,
Upon your mistress.--Emily, I hope
He shall not go afoot.
While I have horses.--Take your choice, and what
You want at any time, let me but know it.
If you serve faithfully, I dare assure you
You'll find a loving mistress.
Let me find that my father ever hated,
Disgrace and blows.
It shall be so; you shall receive all dues
Fit for the honor you have won. 'Twere wrong else.--
Sister, beshrew my heart, you have a servant
That, if I were a woman, would be master;
But you are wise.
Let all the dukes and all the devils roar!
He is at liberty. I have ventured for him,
And out I have brought him; to a little wood
Higher than all the rest spreads like a plane
Fast by a brook, and there he shall keep close
Till I provide him files and food, for yet
His iron bracelets are not off. O Love,
What a stout-hearted child thou art! My father
Durst better have endured cold iron than done it.
Or wit or safety. I have made him know it;
Find me and then condemn me for 't, some wenches,
Some honest-hearted maids, will sing my dirge
And tell to memory my death was noble,
Dying almost a martyr. That way he takes
Be so unmanly as to leave me here.
If he do, maids will not so easily
Trust men again. And yet he has not thanked me
For what I have done; no, not so much as kissed me,
And that, methinks, is not so well; nor scarcely
Could I persuade him to become a free man,
He made such scruples of the wrong he did
To me and to my father. Yet I hope,
When he considers more, this love of mine
Will take more root within him. Let him do
What he will with me, so he use me kindly;
For use me so he shall, or I'll proclaim him,
And to his face, no man. I'll presently
Provide him necessaries and pack my clothes up,
And where there is a path of ground I'll venture,
So he be with me. By him like a shadow
Will be all o'er the prison. I am then
Kissing the man they look for. Farewell, father!
Get many more such prisoners and such daughters,
And shortly you may keep yourself. Now to him.
The Duke has lost Hippolyta; each took
They owe bloomed May, and the Athenians pay it
To th' heart of ceremony. O Queen Emilia,
Fresher than May, sweeter
Than her gold buttons on the boughs, or all
Th' enameled knacks o' th' mead or garden--yea,
We challenge too the bank of any nymph
That makes the stream seem flowers; thou, O jewel
With thy sole presence. In thy rumination
That I, poor man, might eftsoons come between
And chop on some cold thought! Thrice blessed
To drop on such a mistress, expectation
Most guiltless on 't. Tell me, O Lady Fortune,
Next after Emily my sovereign, how far
Hath made me near her; and this beauteous morn,
The prim'st of all the year, presents me with
Be by a pair of kings backed, in a field
That their crowns' titles tried. Alas, alas,
Poor cousin Palamon, poor prisoner, thou
So little dream'st upon my fortune that
Thou think'st thyself the happier thing, to be
So near Emilia; me thou deem'st at Thebes,
And therein wretched, although free. But if
Thou knew'st my mistress breathed on me, and that
What passion would enclose thee!
Thou shouldst perceive my passion if these signs
Of prisonment were off me, and this hand
But owner of a sword. By all oaths in one,
That ever gently looked, the void'st of honor
That e'er bore gentle token, falsest cousin
That ever blood made kin! Call'st thou her thine?
Void of appointment, that thou liest, and art
Nor worth the name of villain. Had I a sword,
And these house clogs away--
Cozener Arcite, give me language such
As thou hast showed me feat.
The circuit of my breast any gross stuff
To form me like your blazon holds me to
This gentleness of answer: 'tis your passion
That thus mistakes, the which, to you being enemy,
Cannot to me be kind. Honor and honesty
You skip them in me, and with them, fair coz,
To show in generous terms your griefs, since that
Your question's with your equal, who professes
To clear his own way with the mind and sword
Of a true gentleman.
My coz, my coz, you have been well advertised
How much I dare; you've seen me use my sword
Against th' advice of fear. Sure, of another
You would not hear me doubted, but your silence
Should break out, though i' th' sanctuary.
Might justify your manhood; you were called
If any day it rain; their valiant temper
Men lose when they incline to treachery,
And then they fight like compelled bears--would fly
Were they not tied.
Speak this and act it in your glass as to
His ear which now disdains you.
Quit me of these cold gyves, give me a sword
Though it be rusty, and the charity
Of one meal lend me. Come before me then,
That Emily is thine, I will forgive
The trespass thou hast done me--yea, my life,
If then thou carry 't; and brave souls in shades
That have died manly, which will seek of me
Some news from Earth, they shall get none but this:
That thou art brave and noble.
Again betake you to your hawthorn house.
With counsel of the night I will be here
With wholesome viands. These impediments
Will I file off. You shall have garments and
Perfumes to kill the smell o' th' prison. After,
When you shall stretch yourself and say but "Arcite,
Both sword and armor.
So noble bear a guilty business? None
But only Arcite. Therefore none but Arcite
In this kind is so bold.
Your offer do 't I only. Sir, your person
Without hypocrisy I may not wish
More than my sword's edge on 't.
Enter your muset, lest this match between 's
Be crossed ere met. Give me your hand; farewell.
Take comfort and be strong.
And do the deed with a bent brow. Most certain
You love me not; be rough with me, and pour
This oil out of your language. By this air,
Not reconciled by reason.
Yet pardon me hard language. When I spur
My horse, I chide him not; content and anger
In me have but one face.	
Hark, sir, they call
The scattered to the banquet; you must guess
Cannot please heaven, and I know your office
Unjustly is achieved.
By bleeding must be cured. I am a suitor
That to your sword you will bequeath this plea,
And talk of it no more.
You are going now to gaze upon my mistress,
For note you, mine she is--
You talk of feeding me to breed me strength.
You are going now to look upon a sun
That strengthens what it looks on; there
You have a vantage o'er me, but enjoy 't till
He has mistook the brake I meant, is gone
After his fancy. 'Tis now well-nigh morning.
No matter; would it were perpetual night,
And darkness lord o' th' world. Hark, 'tis a wolf!
In me hath grief slain fear, and but for one thing,
He had this file. What if I hallowed for him?
If he not answered, I should call a wolf,
And do him but that service. I have heard
Strange howls this livelong night; why may 't not be
They have made prey of him? He has no weapons;
He cannot run; the jingling of his gyves
Might call fell things to listen, who have in them
Smell where resistance is. I'll set it down
He's torn to pieces; they howled many together,
And then they fed on him; so much for that.
Be bold to ring the bell. How stand I then?
All's chared when he is gone. No, no, I lie.
My father's to be hanged for his escape;
Myself to beg, if I prized life so much
As to deny my act, but that I would not,
Should I try death by dozens. I am moped;
Food took I none these two days;
Sipped some water. I have not closed mine eyes
Save when my lids scoured off their brine. Alas,
Dissolve, my life! Let not my sense unsettle,
Lest I should drown, or stab, or hang myself.
Since thy best props are warped! So, which way now?
The best way is the next way to a grave;
Each errant step beside is torment. Lo,
The moon is down, the crickets chirp, the screech
Calls in the dawn. All offices are done
Save what I fail in. But the point is this--
An end, and that is all.
Arcite?
Come forth and fear not; here's no Theseus.
Nor none so honest, Arcite.
We'll argue that hereafter. Come, take courage;
You shall not die thus beastly. Here, sir, drink--
Arcite, thou mightst now poison me.
But I must fear you first. Sit down and, good now,
No more of these vain parleys. Let us not,
Having our ancient reputation with us,
Make talk for fools and cowards. To your health.
Pray sit down, then, and let me entreat you,
By all the honesty and honor in you,
No mention of this woman; 'twill disturb us.
We shall have time enough.
Drink a good hearty draught; it breeds good blood,
Do not you feel it thaw you?
After a draught or two more.
The Duke has more, coz. Eat now.
You have so good a stomach.
Here in the wild woods, cousin?
That have wild consciences.
Your hunger needs no sauce, I see.
But if it did, yours is too tart, sweet cousin.
What is this?
Give me more wine. Here, Arcite, to the wenches
We have known in our days!
The Lord Steward's
Do you remember her?
She loved a black-haired man.
And I have heard some call him Arcite, and--
Out with 't, faith.
What did she there, coz? Play o' th' virginals?
Something she did, sir.
Or two, or three, or ten.
Had her share, too, as I remember, cousin,
Else there be tales abroad. You'll pledge her?
When young men went a-hunting, and a wood,
And a broad beech--and thereby hangs a tale.
Heigh ho!
Away with this strained mirth. I say again
That sigh was breathed for Emily. Base cousin,
Dar'st thou break first?
Earth,
There's nothing in thee honest.
You are a beast now.
There's all things needful: files and shirts and
That that shall quiet all.
Fear me not. You are now too foul. Farewell.
Get off your trinkets; you shall want naught.
The little stars and all, that look like aglets.
The sun has seen my folly.--Palamon!
Alas, no; he's in heaven. Where am I now?
Yonder's the sea, and there's a ship. How 't tumbles!
And there's a rock lies watching under water.
Now, now, it beats upon it; now, now, now,
There's a leak sprung, a sound one! How they cry!
Open her before the wind; you'll lose all else.
Up with a course or two, and tack about, boys!
Good night, good night; you're gone. I am very
Would I could find a fine frog; he would tell me
News from all parts o' th' world; then would I make
By east and northeast to the king of pygmies,
For he tells fortunes rarely. Now my father,
Twenty to one, is trussed up in a trice
Tomorrow morning. I'll say never a word.
To put my breast against. I shall sleep like a top else.
Gerald.
Where's the Bavian?--My friend, carry your tail
The next gloves that I give her shall be dogskin;
There was three fools, fell out about an owlet--
Buzz!--Friend, you must eat no white bread; if
Away, boys! I hear the horns. Give me some
Pallas, inspire me!
Ladies, sit down. We'll stay it.
Thou doughty duke, all hail!--All hail, sweet ladies!
If you but favor, our country pastime made is.
We are a few of those collected here
That ruder tongues distinguish "villager."
And to say verity, and not to fable,
We are a merry rout, or else a rabble,
Or company, or by a figure, chorus,
That 'fore thy dignity will dance a morris.
And I that am the rectifier of all,
By title pedagogus, that let fall
The birch upon the breeches of the small ones,
And humble with a ferula the tall ones,
Do here present this machine, or this frame.
And, dainty duke, whose doughty dismal fame
From Dis to Daedalus, from post to pillar,
Is blown abroad, help me, thy poor well-willer,
And with thy twinkling eyes look right and straight
Upon this mighty "Morr," of mickle weight--
Makes "Morris," and the cause that we came hither.
The body of our sport, of no small study,
To speak before thy noble grace this tenner,
At whose great feet I offer up my penner.
The next, the Lord of May and Lady bright,
The Chambermaid and Servingman by night
That seek out silent hanging; then mine Host
And his fat Spouse, that welcomes to their cost
The galled traveler, and with a beck'ning
Informs the tapster to inflame the reck'ning;
Then the beest-eating Clown; and next the Fool,
The Bavian with long tail and eke long tool,
Cum multis aliis that make a dance;
Say "ay," and all shall presently advance.
Ay, ay, by any means, dear Domine.
Intrate, filii. Come forth and foot it.
Jailer's Daughter; they perform a morris dance.]
Take twenty, Domine.--How does my sweetheart?
Never so pleased, sir.
And, for a preface, I never heard a better.
Schoolmaster, I thank you.--One see 'em all
And here's something to paint your pole withal.
Emilia, Pirithous, and Train exit.]
Come, we are all made. Dii deaeque omnes,
You have danced rarely, wenches.
About this hour my cousin gave his faith
To visit me again, and with him bring
Two swords and two good armors. If he fail,
He's neither man nor soldier. When he left me,
My lost strength to me, I was grown so low
And crestfall'n with my wants. I thank thee, Arcite,
Thou art yet a fair foe, and I feel myself,
With this refreshing, able once again
To outdure danger. To delay it longer
Would make the world think, when it comes to
That I lay fatting like a swine to fight
And not a soldier. Therefore, this blest morning
Shall be the last; and that sword he refuses,
If it but hold, I kill him with. 'Tis justice.
So, love and fortune for me!
Good morrow, noble kinsman.
To too much pains, sir.
Is but a debt to honor and my duty.
Would you were so in all, sir; I could wish you
As kind a kinsman as you force me find
Might thank you, not my blows.
Well done, a noble recompense.
Defy me in these fair terms, and you show
More than a mistress to me. No more anger,
As you love anything that's honorable!
We were not bred to talk, man; when we are armed
And both upon our guards, then let our fury,
Like meeting of two tides, fly strongly from us,
And then to whom the birthright of this beauty
Truly pertains--without upbraidings, scorns,
Despisings of our persons, and such poutings,
Fitter for girls and schoolboys--will be seen,
And quickly, yours or mine. Will 't please you arm,
Or if you feel yourself not fitting yet
And furnished with your old strength, I'll stay,
And ev'ry day discourse you into health,
As I am spared. Your person I am friends with,
And I could wish I had not said I loved her,
Though I had died. But loving such a lady,
And justifying my love, I must not fly from 't.
Arcite, thou art so brave an enemy
That no man but thy cousin's fit to kill thee.
Wilt thou exceed in all, or dost thou do it
To make me spare thee?
You are deceived, for as I am a soldier,
Then, as I am an honest man and love
With all the justice of affection,
This I'll take.
Pray thee tell me, cousin,
Where got'st thou this good armor?
And to say true, I stole it. Do I pinch you?
Is 't not too heavy?
But I shall make it serve.
By any means.
No, no, we'll use no horses. I perceive
You would fain be at that fight.
Faith, so am I. Good cousin, thrust the buckle
Through far enough.
Will you fight bare-armed?
But use your gauntlets though. Those are o' th' least.
Prithee take mine, good cousin.
How do I look? Am I fall'n much away?
Faith, very little; love has used you kindly.
Methinks this armor's very like that, Arcite,
Thou wor'st that day the three kings fell, but lighter.
That was a very good one, and that day,
Upon the left wing of the enemy,
Was vainly labored in me; you outwent me,
Nor could my wishes reach you; yet a little
You are modest, cousin.
Methought I heard a dreadful clap of thunder
Break from the troop.
The lightning of your valor. Stay a little;
Is not this piece too strait?
Stand off, then.
Here's one; if it but hold, I ask no more
For all my hopes. My cause and honor guard me!
And me my love!
Is there aught else to say?
This only, and no more: thou art mine aunt's son.
And that blood we desire to shed is mutual--
In me thine, and in thee mine. My sword
Is in my hand, and if thou kill'st me,
The gods and I forgive thee. If there be
Fight bravely, cousin. Give me thy noble hand.
Here, Palamon. This hand shall never more
Come near thee with such friendship.
If I fall, curse me, and say I was a coward,
For none but such dare die in these just trials.
Once more farewell, my cousin.
Lo, cousin, lo, our folly has undone us!
This is the Duke, a-hunting, as I told you.
If we be found, we are wretched. O, retire,
For honor's sake, and safely, presently
Into your bush again. Sir, we shall find
Too many hours to die in. Gentle cousin,
If you be seen, you perish instantly
For breaking prison, and I, if you reveal me,
For my contempt. Then all the world will scorn us,
And say we had a noble difference,
But base disposers of it.
This great adventure to a second trial.
He that faints now, shame take him! Put thyself
Upon thy present guard--
Or I will make th' advantage of this hour
Mine own, and what to come shall threaten me
Thee and all crosses else.
Thou shalt know, Palamon, I dare as well
Die as discourse or sleep. Only this fears me:
The law will have the honor of our ends.
Have at thy life!
Pirithous and train.]
What ignorant and mad malicious traitors
Are you, that 'gainst the tenor of my laws
Are making battle, thus like knights appointed,
Without my leave and officers of arms?
By Castor, both shall die.
We are certainly both traitors, both despisers
Of thee and of thy goodness. I am Palamon,
That cannot love thee, he that broke thy prison.
Think well what that deserves. And this is Arcite.
Was begged and banished; this is he contemns thee
And what thou dar'st do; and in this disguise,
Against thine own edict, follows thy sister,
That fortunate bright star, the fair Emilia,
Whose servant--if there be a right in seeing
And first bequeathing of the soul to--justly
This treachery, like a most trusty lover,
As thou art spoken, great and virtuous,
The true decider of all injuries,
Say "Fight again," and thou shalt see me, Theseus,
Do such a justice thou thyself wilt envy.
Then take my life; I'll woo thee to 't.
What more than man is this!
Thy breath of mercy, Theseus. 'Tis to me
And no more moved. Where this man calls me
Let me say thus much: if in love be treason,
In service of so excellent a beauty,
As I love most, and in that faith will perish,
As I have brought my life here to confirm it,
As I have served her truest, worthiest,
As I dare kill this cousin that denies it,
So let me be most traitor, and you please me.
For scorning thy edict, duke, ask that lady
Why she is fair, and why her eyes command me
Stay here to love her; and if she say "traitor,"
Thou shalt have pity of us both, O Theseus,
If unto neither thou show mercy. Stop,
As thou art just, thy noble ear against us;
As thou art valiant, for thy cousin's soul,
Whose twelve strong labors crown his memory,
Let's die together at one instant, duke;
Only a little let him fall before me,
That I may tell my soul he shall not have her.
Has ten times more offended, for I gave him
More mercy than you found, sir, your offenses
Being no more than his.--None here speak for 'em,
For ere the sun set both shall sleep forever.
Alas, the pity! Now or never, sister,
Speak not to be denied. That face of yours
Will bear the curses else of after ages
For these lost cousins.
The misadventure of their own eyes kill 'em.
Yet that I will be woman and have pity,
My knees shall grow to th' ground but I'll get mercy.
Help me, dear sister; in a deed so virtuous,
The powers of all women will be with us.
Most royal brother--
By your own spotless honor--
That fair hand, and that honest heart you gave me--
By that you would have pity in another;
By your own virtues infinite--
By all the chaste nights I have ever pleased you--
These are strange conjurings.
By all our friendship, sir, by all our dangers;
By all you love most, wars and this sweet lady--
By that you would have trembled to deny
In which you swore I went beyond all women,
Almost all men, and yet I yielded, Theseus--
To crown all this: by your most noble soul,
Which cannot want due mercy, I beg first--
Next hear my prayers--
For mercy.
You make my faith reel.  Say I felt
Compassion to 'em both, how would you place it?
Upon their lives, but with their banishments.
You are a right woman, sister: you have pity,
But want the understanding where to use it.
If you desire their lives, invent a way
Safer than banishment. Can these two live,
And have the agony of love about 'em,
And not kill one another? Every day
They'd fight about you, hourly bring your honor
In public question with their swords. Be wise, then,
And here forget 'em; it concerns your credit
And my oath equally. I have said they die.
Better they fall by th' law than one another.
Bow not my honor.
That oath was rashly made, and in your anger;
Your reason will not hold it. If such vows
Stand for express will, all the world must perish.
Besides, I have another oath 'gainst yours,
Of more authority, I am sure more love,
Not made in passion neither, but good heed.
What is it, sister?
That you would ne'er deny me anything
Fit for my modest suit and your free granting.
Think how you maim your honor--
For now I am set a-begging, sir, I am deaf
To all but your compassion--how their lives
Might breed the ruin of my name. Opinion!
Shall anything that loves me perish for me?
That were a cruel wisdom. Do men prune
The straight young boughs that blush with thousand
Because they may be rotten? O, Duke Theseus,
The goodly mothers that have groaned for these,
And all the longing maids that ever loved,
If your vow stand, shall curse me and my beauty,
And in their funeral songs for these two cousins
Despise my cruelty, and cry woe worth me,
Till I am nothing but the scorn of women.
For heaven's sake, save their lives, and banish 'em.
On what conditions?
To make me their contention, or to know me,
To tread upon thy dukedom, and to be,
Wherever they shall travel, ever strangers
To one another.
Before I take this oath! Forget I love her?
Our swords and cause along; else never trifle,
But take our lives, duke. I must love, and will,
And for that love must and dare kill this cousin
On any piece the Earth has.
Take these conditions?
No, never, duke. 'Tis worse to me than begging
To take my life so basely; though I think
The honor of affection, and die for her,
Make death a devil!
What may be done? For now I feel compassion.
Let it not fall again, sir.
If one of them were dead, as one must, are you
Content to take th' other to your husband?
They cannot both enjoy you. They are princes
As goodly as your own eyes, and as noble
As ever fame yet spoke of. Look upon 'em,
And, if you can love, end this difference.
With all our souls.
Must die then.
If I fall from that mouth, I fall with favor,
And lovers yet unborn shall bless my ashes.
If she refuse me, yet my grave will wed me,
And soldiers sing my epitaph.
For me, a hair shall never fall of these men.
What will become of 'em?
And, by mine honor, once again, it stands,
Or both shall die: you shall both to your country,
And each within this month, accompanied
With three fair knights, appear again in this place,
In which I'll plant a pyramid; and whether,
Before us that are here, can force his cousin
By fair and knightly strength to touch the pillar,
He shall enjoy her; the other lose his head,
And all his friends; nor shall he grudge to fall,
Nor think he dies with interest in this lady.
Will this content you?
Are you content, sister?
Else both miscarry.
Come, shake hands again, then,
And take heed, as you are gentlemen, this quarrel
Sleep till the hour prefixed, and hold your course.
We dare not fail thee, Theseus.
Now usage like to princes and to friends.
When you return, who wins I'll settle here;
Who loses, yet I'll weep upon his bier.
Heard you no more? Was nothing said of me
Concerning the escape of Palamon?
Good sir, remember!
For I came home before the business
Was fully ended. Yet I might perceive,
Ere I departed, a great likelihood
Of both their pardons; for Hippolyta
And fair-eyed Emily, upon their knees,
Begged with such handsome pity that the Duke,
Methought, stood staggering whether he should
His rash oath or the sweet compassion
Of those two ladies. And, to second them,
That truly noble prince, Pirithous--
Half his own heart--set in too, that I hope
All shall be well. Neither heard I one question
Of your name or his 'scape.
Be of good comfort, man; I bring you news,
Good news.
And got your pardon, and discovered how
And by whose means he escaped, which was your
Whose pardon is procured too; and the prisoner,
Not to be held ungrateful to her goodness,
Has given a sum of money to her marriage--
And ever bring good news.
Why, as it should be: they that ne'er begged
But they prevailed had their suits fairly granted;
The prisoners have their lives.
But there be new conditions, which you'll hear of
At better time.
How good they'll prove I know not.
Alas, sir, where's your daughter?
This morning.
Sir, when did she sleep?
You make me mind her; but this very day
So far from what she was, so childishly,
So sillily, as if she were a fool,
An innocent, and I was very angry.
But what of her, sir?
But you must know it, and as good by me
As by another that less loves her.
No, sir, not well.
Believe you'll find it so.
What you told me. The gods comfort her!
Either this was her love to Palamon,
Or fear of my miscarrying on his 'scape,
Or both.
In the great lake that lies behind the palace,
From the far shore--thick set with reeds and
As patiently I was attending sport,
To his own skill, came near, but yet perceived not
Who made the sound, the rushes and the reeds
Had so encompassed it. I laid me down
And listened to the words she sung, for then,
Through a small glade cut by the fishermen,
She sung much, but no sense; only I heard her
Repeat this often: "Palamon is gone,
Is gone to th' wood to gather mulberries;
And what shall I do then? I'll bring a bevy,
With chaplets on their heads of daffadillies,
With cherry lips and cheeks of damask roses,
And all we'll dance an antic 'fore the Duke,
And beg his pardon." Then she talked of you, sir--
That you must lose your head tomorrow morning,
And she must gather flowers to bury you,
And see the house made handsome. Then she sung
Nothing but "Willow, willow, willow," and between
Ever was "Palamon, fair Palamon,"
And "Palamon was a tall young man." The place
Was knee-deep where she sat; her careless tresses,
Thousand freshwater flowers of several colors,
That methought she appeared like the fair nymph
That feeds the lake with waters, or as Iris
Newly dropped down from heaven. Rings she made
Of rushes that grew by, and to 'em spoke
The prettiest posies: "Thus our true love's tied,"
And then she wept, and sung again, and sighed,
And with the same breath smiled and kissed her
Alas, what pity it is!
She saw me, and straight sought the flood. I saved
And set her safe to land, when presently
She slipped away, and to the city made
With such a cry and swiftness that, believe me,
She left me far behind her. Three or four
And fell, scarce to be got away. I left them with her
And hither came to tell you.
Here they are.
Is not this a fine song?
The wind's fair!--Top the bowline!--Out with the
Yet I may bind those wounds up that must open
And bleed to death for my sake else. I'll choose,
And end their strife. Two such young handsome men
Shall never fall for me; their weeping mothers,
Following the dead cold ashes of their sons,
Shall never curse my cruelty.
Good heaven,
What a sweet face has Arcite! If wise Nature,
With all her best endowments, all those beauties
She sows into the births of noble bodies,
Were here a mortal woman, and had in her
The coy denials of young maids, yet doubtless
She would run mad for this man. What an eye,
Of what a fiery sparkle and quick sweetness,
Has this young prince! Here Love himself sits
Just such another wanton Ganymede
Set Jove afire with, and enforced the god
Snatch up the goodly boy and set him by him,
Of what a spacious majesty, he carries,
Arched like the great-eyed Juno's but far sweeter,
Smoother than Pelops' shoulder! Fame and Honor,
Methinks, from hence as from a promontory
Pointed in heaven, should clap their wings and sing
To all the under world the loves and fights
Of gods and such men near 'em.
Palamon
Is but his foil, to him a mere dull shadow;
He's swart and meager, of an eye as heavy
As if he had lost his mother; a still temper,
No stirring in him, no alacrity;
Of all this sprightly sharpness not a smile.
Yet these that we count errors may become him;
Narcissus was a sad boy but a heavenly.
That women ought to beat me. On my knees
And only beautiful, and these the eyes,
These the bright lamps of beauty, that command
And threaten love, and what young maid dare cross
What a bold gravity, and yet inviting,
Has this brown manly face! O Love, this only
From this hour is complexion. Lie there, Arcite.
Thou art a changeling to him, a mere gypsy,
And this the noble body. I am sotted,
Utterly lost. My virgin's faith has fled me.
For if my brother but even now had asked me
Whether I loved, I had run mad for Arcite.
Now, if my sister, more for Palamon.
Stand both together. Now, come ask me, brother.
Alas, I know not! Ask me now, sweet sister.
That, having two fair gauds of equal sweetness,
Cannot distinguish, but must cry for both.
How now, sir?
Madam, I bring you news: the knights are come.
To end the quarrel?
What sins have I committed, chaste Diana,
That my unspotted youth must now be soiled
With blood of princes, and my chastity
Be made the altar where the lives of lovers--
Two greater and two better never yet
Made mothers joy--must be the sacrifice
To my unhappy beauty?
Quickly, by any means; I long to see 'em.
And with them their fair knights. Now, my fair
You must love one of them.
So neither for my sake should fall untimely.
Who saw 'em?
From whence come you, sir?
You that have seen them, what they are.
And truly what I think. Six braver spirits
Than these they have brought, if we judge by the
In the first place with Arcite, by his seeming,
Should be a stout man, by his face a prince--
His very looks so say him; his complexion
Nearer a brown than black--stern and yet noble--
Which shows him hardy, fearless, proud of dangers;
The circles of his eyes show fire within him,
And as a heated lion, so he looks.
His hair hangs long behind him, black and shining
Like ravens' wings; his shoulders broad and strong,
Armed long and round; and on his thigh a sword
Hung by a curious baldric, when he frowns
To seal his will with. Better, o' my conscience,
Was never soldier's friend.
Thou hast well described him.
Methinks, of him that's first with Palamon.
Pray speak him, friend.
And, if it may be, greater; for his show
Has all the ornament of honor in 't:
He's somewhat bigger than the knight he spoke of,
But of a face far sweeter; his complexion
Is, as a ripe grape, ruddy. He has felt
Without doubt what he fights for, and so apter
To make this cause his own. In 's face appears
All the fair hopes of what he undertakes,
And when he's angry, then a settled valor,
Not tainted with extremes, runs through his body
And guides his arm to brave things. Fear he cannot;
He shows no such soft temper. His head's yellow,
Hard-haired and curled, thick-twined like ivy tods,
Not to undo with thunder. In his face
The livery of the warlike maid appears,
Pure red and white, for yet no beard has blessed him.
And in his rolling eyes sits Victory,
As if she ever meant to crown his valor.
His nose stands high, a character of honor;
His red lips, after fights, are fit for ladies.
Must these men die too?
Sounds like a trumpet. All his lineaments
Are as a man would wish 'em, strong and clean.
He wears a well-steeled axe, the staff of gold;
His age some five-and-twenty.
As great as any; fairer promises
In such a body yet I never looked on.
Are they not sweet ones?
Being so few, and well disposed, they show
Great and fine art in nature. He's white-haired--
Not wanton white, but such a manly color
Next to an auburn; tough and nimble-set,
Which shows an active soul. His arms are brawny,
Lined with strong sinews--to the shoulder-piece
Gently they swell, like women new-conceived,
Which speaks him prone to labor, never fainting
Under the weight of arms; stout-hearted still,
But when he stirs, a tiger. He's grey-eyed,
Which yields compassion where he conquers; sharp
To spy advantages, and where he finds 'em,
He's swift to make 'em his. He does no wrongs,
Nor takes none. He's round-faced, and when he
He shows a lover; when he frowns, a soldier.
About his head he wears the winner's oak,
And in it stuck the favor of his lady.
His age some six-and-thirty. In his hand
He bears a charging-staff embossed with silver.
Are they all thus?
Now, as I have a soul, I long to see 'em.--
Lady, you shall see men fight now.
But not the cause, my lord. They would show
Bravely about the titles of two kingdoms;
Weep not till they weep blood. Wench, it must be.
You have steeled 'em with your beauty. 
Pirithous.)] Honored friend,
To you I give the field; pray order it
Fitting the persons that must use it.
Come, I'll go visit 'em. I cannot stay--
Their fame has fired me so--till they appear.
Good friend, be royal.
Poor wench, go weep, for whosoever wins
Loses a noble cousin for thy sins.
Look where she comes; you shall perceive her
Poor soul.
Proserpine. Then will I make Palamon a nosegay;
This you must do: confine her to a place where
Sing to her such green songs of love as she says
Palamon hath sung in prison. Come to her stuck
All this shall become Palamon, for Palamon can
Desire to eat with her, carve her, drink to her, and
It is a falsehood she is in, which is with falsehoods
Now let 'em enter and before the gods
Tender their holy prayers. Let the temples
Burn bright with sacred fires, and the altars
In hallowed clouds commend their swelling incense
To those above us. Let no due be wanting.
They have a noble work in hand will honor
The very powers that love 'em.
You valiant and strong-hearted enemies,
You royal german foes, that this day come
To blow that nearness out that flames between you,
Lay by your anger for an hour and, dove-like,
Before the holy altars of your helpers,
The all-feared gods, bow down your stubborn
Your ire is more than mortal; so your help be.
And as the gods regard you, fight with justice.
The glass is running now that cannot finish
Till one of us expire. Think you but thus,
That were there aught in me which strove to show
Mine enemy in this business, were 't one eye
Against another, arm oppressed by arm,
Though parcel of myself. Then from this gather
How I should tender you.
To push your name, your ancient love, our kindred
Out of my memory, and i' th' selfsame place
To seat something I would confound. So hoist we
The sails that must these vessels port even where
The heavenly Limiter pleases.
Before I turn, let me embrace thee, cousin.
This I shall never do again.
Why, let it be so. Farewell, coz.
Knights, kinsmen, lovers, yea, my sacrifices,
True worshippers of Mars, whose spirit in you
Expels the seeds of fear and th' apprehension
Which still is father of it, go with me
Before the god of our profession. There
Require of him the hearts of lions and
The breath of tigers, yea, the fierceness too,
Yea, the speed also--to go on, I mean;
Else wish we to be snails. You know my prize
Must be dragged out of blood; force and great feat
Must put my garland on, where she sticks,
The queen of flowers. Our intercession, then,
Must be to him that makes the camp a cistern
Brimmed with the blood of men. Give me your aid,
And bend your spirits towards him.
Thou mighty one, that with thy power hast turned
Green Neptune into purple, whose approach
Comets prewarn, whose havoc in vast field
Unearthed skulls proclaim, whose breath blows
The teeming Ceres' foison, who dost pluck
With hand armipotent from forth blue clouds
The masoned turrets, that both mak'st and break'st
The stony girths of cities; me thy pupil,
Youngest follower of thy drum, instruct this day
With military skill, that to thy laud
Be styled the lord o' th' day. Give me, great Mars,
Some token of thy pleasure.
Shaker of o'er-rank states, thou grand decider
Of dusty and old titles, that heal'st with blood
The Earth when it is sick, and cur'st the world
Thy signs auspiciously, and in thy name
To my design march boldly.--Let us go.	
Our stars must glister with new fire, or be
Today extinct. Our argument is love,
Which, if the goddess of it grant, she gives
Victory too. Then blend your spirits with mine,
You whose free nobleness do make my cause
Your personal hazard. To the goddess Venus
Commend we our proceeding, and implore
Her power unto our party.
Hail, sovereign queen of secrets, who hast power
To call the fiercest tyrant from his rage
And weep unto a girl; that hast the might
Even with an eye-glance to choke Mars's drum
And turn th' alarm to whispers; that canst make
Before Apollo; that mayst force the king
To be his subject's vassal, and induce
Stale gravity to dance. The polled bachelor,
Whose youth, like wanton boys through bonfires,
Have skipped thy flame, at seventy thou canst catch,
And make him, to the scorn of his hoarse throat,
Abuse young lays of love. What godlike power
Hast thou not power upon? To Phoebus thou
Add'st flames hotter than his; the heavenly fires
Did scorch his mortal son, thine him. The huntress,
All moist and cold, some say, began to throw
Her bow away and sigh. Take to thy grace
Me, thy vowed soldier, who do bear thy yoke
As 'twere a wreath of roses, yet is heavier
Than lead itself, stings more than nettles.
Ne'er revealed secret, for I knew none--would not,
Had I kenned all that were. I never practiced
Upon man's wife, nor would the libels read
Of liberal wits. I never at great feasts
Sought to betray a beauty, but have blushed
At simp'ring sirs that did. I have been harsh
To large confessors, and have hotly asked them
If they had mothers--I had one, a woman,
And women 'twere they wronged. I knew a man
Of eighty winters--this I told them--who
To put life into dust. The aged cramp
Had screwed his square foot round;
The gout had knit his fingers into knots;
Torturing convulsions from his globy eyes
Had almost drawn their spheres, that what was life
In him seemed torture. This anatomy
Had by his young fair fere a boy, and I
Believed it was his, for she swore it was,
And who would not believe her? Brief, I am
To those that prate and have done, no companion;
To those that boast and have not, a defier;
To those that would and cannot, a rejoicer.
Yea, him I do not love that tells close offices
The foulest way, nor names concealments in
The boldest language. Such a one I am,
And vow that lover never yet made sigh
Truer than I. O, then, most soft sweet goddess,
Give me the victory of this question, which
Is true love's merit, and bless me with a sign
Of thy great pleasure.
In mortal bosoms, whose chase is this world
And we in herds thy game, I give thee thanks
For this fair token, which being laid unto
Mine innocent true heart, arms in assurance
My body to this business.--Let us rise
And bow before the goddess.	
Time comes on.
Abandoner of revels, mute contemplative,
Sweet, solitary, white as chaste, and pure
As wind-fanned snow, who to thy female knights
Allow'st no more blood than will make a blush,
Which is their order's robe, I here, thy priest,
Am humbled 'fore thine altar. O, vouchsafe
With that thy rare green eye, which never yet
Beheld thing maculate, look on thy virgin,
And, sacred silver mistress, lend thine ear--
Which ne'er heard scurrile term, into whose port
Ne'er entered wanton sound--to my petition,
Seasoned with holy fear. This is my last
Of vestal office. I am bride-habited
But maiden-hearted. A husband I have 'pointed,
But do not know him. Out of two I should
Choose one, and pray for his success, but I
Am guiltless of election. Of mine eyes,
Were I to lose one--they are equal precious--
Go to 't unsentenced. Therefore, most modest queen,
He of the two pretenders that best loves me
And has the truest title in 't, let him
Take off my wheaten garland, or else grant
The file and quality I hold I may
Continue in thy band.
See what our general of ebbs and flows
Out from the bowels of her holy altar
With sacred act advances: but one rose.
If well inspired, this battle shall confound
Both these brave knights, and I, a virgin flower,
Must grow alone unplucked.
The flower is fall'n, the tree descends. O mistress,
Thou here dischargest me. I shall be gathered;
Unclasp thy mystery!--I hope she's pleased;
Her signs were gracious.
Has this advice I told you done any good upon her?
Have half-persuaded her that I am Palamon;
Within this half-hour she came smiling to me,
And asked me what I would eat, and when I would
For there the cure lies mainly.
She would watch with me tonight, for well she knew
What hour my fit would take me.
And when your fit comes, fit her home,
And presently.
You did so?
You should observe her ev'ry way.
That's all one, if you make a noise.
If she entreat again, do anything.
Lie with her, if she ask you.
Yes, in the way of cure.
Ne'er cast your child away for honesty.
Cure her first this way; then if she will be honest,
She has the path before her.
Thank you, doctor.
And let's see how she is.
Her Palamon stays for her. But, doctor,
Methinks you are i' th' wrong still.	
You fathers are fine fools. Her honesty?
And we should give her physic till we find that!
Why, do you think she is not honest, sir?
How old is she?
But that's all one; 'tis nothing to our purpose.
Whate'er her father says, if you perceive
Her mood inclining that way that I spoke of,
Videlicet, the way of flesh--you have me?
Yes, very well, sir.
And do it home; it cures her, ipso facto,
The melancholy humor that infects her.
She comes; pray humor her.
Come, your love Palamon stays for you, child,
And has done this long hour, to visit you.
He's a kind gentleman, and I am much bound to
Did you ne'er see the horse he gave me?
How do you like him?
You never saw him dance?
He dances very finely, very comely,
And for a jig, come cut and long tail to him,
He turns you like a top.
He'll dance the morris twenty mile an hour,
And that will founder the best hobbyhorse,
If I have any skill, in all the parish,
And gallops to the tune of "Light o' love."
What think you of this horse?
Alas, that's nothing.
Of all his hay and provender. That hostler
Must rise betime that cozens him. You know
The chestnut mare the Duke has?
She is horribly in love with him, poor beast,
But he is like his master, coy and scornful.
What dowry has she?
And twenty strike of oats, but he'll ne'er have her.
He lisps in 's neighing able to entice
Make curtsy; here your love comes.
How do you?	
That's a fine maid; there's a curtsy!
Yours to command i' th' way of honesty.--
How far is 't now to th' end o' th' world, my masters?
Why, a day's journey, wench.
What shall we do there, wench?
What is there else to do?
If we shall keep our wedding there.
For there, I will assure you, we shall find
Some blind priest for the purpose, that will venture
To marry us; for here they are nice and foolish.
Besides, my father must be hanged tomorrow,
And that would be a blot i' th' business.
Are not you Palamon?
Yes, but you care not for me; I have nothing
But this poor petticoat and two coarse smocks.
That's all one; I will have you.
Yes, by this fair hand, will I.
Why do you rub my kiss off?
And will perfume me finely against the wedding.
Is not this your cousin Arcite?	
And I am glad my cousin Palamon
Has made so fair a choice.
Yes, without doubt.
We shall have many children.  Lord,
My Palamon, I hope, will grow too, finely,
Now he's at liberty. Alas, poor chicken,
He was kept down with hard meat and ill lodging,
But I'll kiss him up again.
What do you here? You'll lose the noblest sight
That e'er was seen.
You bear a charge there too.
But still preserve her in this way.
Let's get her in.
And then we'll play at cards.
And then we'll sleep together.
Yes, marry, will we.
Emilia, Pirithous, and some Attendants.]
Than this decision; ev'ry blow that falls
Threats a brave life; each stroke laments
The place whereon it falls, and sounds more like
It is enough my hearing shall be punished
With what shall happen, 'gainst the which there is
No deafing but to hear; not taint mine eye
With dread sights it may shun.
Your sister will no further.
She shall see deeds of honor in their kind,
Which sometime show well, penciled. Nature now
Shall make and act the story, the belief
Both sealed with eye and ear.--You must be present;
You are the victor's meed, the price and garland
To crown the question's title.
If I were there, I'd wink.
This trial is as 'twere i' th' night, and you
The only star to shine.
There is but envy in that light which shows
The one the other. Darkness, which ever was
The dam of horror, who does stand accursed
Of many mortal millions, may even now,
By casting her black mantle over both,
That neither could find other, get herself
Some part of a good name, and many a murder
Set off whereto she's guilty.
In faith, I will not.
Their valor at your eye. Know, of this war
You are the treasure, and must needs be by
To give the service pay.
The title of a kingdom may be tried
Out of itself.
Those that remain with you could wish their office
To any of their enemies.
By some small start of time. He whom the gods
Do of the two know best, I pray them he
Be made your lot.
Arcite is gently visaged, yet his eye
Is like an engine bent, or a sharp weapon
In a soft sheath; mercy and manly courage
Are bedfellows in his visage. Palamon
Has a most menacing aspect; his brow
Is graved, and seems to bury what it frowns on;
Yet sometimes 'tis not so, but alters to
The quality of his thoughts. Long time his eye
Will dwell upon his object. Melancholy
Becomes him nobly; so does Arcite's mirth;
But Palamon's sadness is a kind of mirth,
So mingled, as if mirth did make him sad
And sadness merry. Those darker humors that
Stick misbecomingly on others, on them
Live in fair dwelling.
Hark how yon spurs to spirit do incite
The princes to their proof! Arcite may win me,
And yet may Palamon wound Arcite to
The spoiling of his figure. O, what pity
Enough for such a chance? If I were by,
Towards my seat, and in that motion might
Omit a ward or forfeit an offense
Which craved that very time.
It is much better
Than minister to such harm!
What is the chance?
He looked all grace and success, and he is
Doubtless the prim'st of men. I prithee run
And tell me how it goes.
Run and inquire.	
Upon my right side still I wore thy picture,
Palamon's on the left--why so, I know not.
On the sinister side the heart lies; Palamon
Had the best-boding chance.
This burst of clamor
Is sure th' end o' th' combat.
They said that Palamon had Arcite's body
Within an inch o' th' pyramid, that the cry
Was general "A Palamon." But anon,
Th' assistants made a brave redemption, and
The two bold titlers at this instant are
Hand to hand at it.
Both into one--O, why, there were no woman
Worth so composed a man! Their single share,
Their nobleness peculiar to them, gives
The prejudice of disparity, value's shortness,
To any lady breathing.
More exulting?
Set both thine ears to th' business.
And "Victory! Hark, Arcite, victory!"
The combat's consummation is proclaimed
By the wind instruments.
That Arcite was no babe. God's lid, his richness
And costliness of spirit looked through him; it could
No more be hid in him than fire in flax,
Than humble banks can go to law with waters
That drift-winds force to raging. I did think
Good Palamon would miscarry, yet I knew not
Why I did think so. Our reasons are not prophets
When oft our fancies are. They are coming off.
Alas, poor Palamon!
Arcite as victor, and Attendants and others.]
Lo, where our sister is in expectation,
Yet quaking and unsettled.--Fairest Emily,
The gods by their divine arbitrament
Have given you this knight; he is a good one
As ever struck at head.--Give me your hands.
Receive you her, you him. Be plighted with
To buy you I have lost what's dearest to me
Save what is bought, and yet I purchase cheaply,
As I do rate your value.
He speaks now of as brave a knight as e'er
Did spur a noble steed. Surely the gods
Would have him die a bachelor, lest his race
Should show i' th' world too godlike. His behavior
So charmed me that methought Alcides was
To him a sow of lead. If I could praise
Each part of him to th' all I have spoke, your Arcite
Did not lose by 't, for he that was thus good
Encountered yet his better. I have heard
Two emulous Philomels beat the ear o' th' night
With their contentious throats, now one the higher,
Anon the other, then again the first,
And by-and-by out-breasted, that the sense
Could not be judge between 'em. So it fared
Good space between these kinsmen, till heavens did
Make hardly one the winner.--Wear the garland
With joy that you have won.--For the subdued,
Give them our present justice, since I know
Their lives but pinch 'em. Let it here be done.
The scene's not for our seeing. Go we hence
Right joyful, with some sorrow.--Arm your prize;
The which it will deliver.
But that your wills have said it must be so,
And charge me live to comfort this unfriended,
This miserable prince, that cuts away
That four such eyes should be so fixed on one
That two must needs be blind for 't.
There's many a man alive that hath outlived
The love o' th' people; yea, i' th' selfsame state
Stands many a father with his child. Some comfort
We have by so considering. We expire,
And not without men's pity. To live still,
Have their good wishes; we prevent
The loathsome misery of age, beguile
The gout and rheum that in lag hours attend
For gray approachers; we come towards the gods
Young and unwappered, not halting under crimes
Many and stale. That sure shall please the gods
Sooner than such, to give us nectar with 'em,
For we are more clear spirits. My dear kinsmen,
Whose lives for this poor comfort are laid down,
You have sold 'em too too cheap.
Of more content? O'er us the victors have
Fortune, whose title is as momentary
As to us death is certain. A grain of honor
They not o'er-weigh us.
And with our patience anger tott'ring Fortune,
Who at her certain'st reels.
Taste to you all.  Ah ha, my friend, my
Your gentle daughter gave me freedom once;
You'll see 't done now forever. Pray, how does she?
Gave me some sorrow.
And to be married shortly.
Commend me to her, and to piece her portion,
Tender her this.	
Is it a maid?
Than I can quit or speak of.
The gods requite you all and make her thankful!
Adieu, and let my life be now as short
As my leave-taking.	
Enter in haste a Messenger.]
Hold, hold! O, hold, hold, hold!
Hold, ho! It is a cursed haste you made
If you have done so quickly!--Noble Palamon,
The gods will show their glory in a life
That thou art yet to lead.
When Venus, I have said, is false? How do things
Arise, great sir, and give the tidings ear
That are most dearly sweet and bitter.
Hath waked us from our dream?
Mounted upon a steed that Emily
Did first bestow on him--a black one, owing
Not a hair worth of white, which some will say
Weakens his price, and many will not buy
His goodness with this note, which superstition
Here finds allowance--on this horse is Arcite
Trotting the stones of Athens--which the calkins
Did rather tell than trample, for the horse
Would make his length a mile, if 't pleased his rider
To put pride in him. As he thus went counting
The flinty pavement, dancing, as 'twere, to th' music
His own hooves made--for, as they say, from iron
Came music's origin--what envious flint,
Cold as old Saturn, and like him possessed
With fire malevolent, darted a spark,
Or what fierce sulphur else, to this end made,
Took toy at this and fell to what disorder
His power could give his will; bounds, comes on end,
Forgets school-doing, being therein trained
And of kind manage. Pig-like he whines
At the sharp rowel, which he frets at rather
Than any jot obeys; seeks all foul means
Of boist'rous and rough jadery to disseat
His lord that kept it bravely. When naught served,
When neither curb would crack, girth break, nor
Disroot his rider whence he grew, but that
He kept him 'tween his legs, on his hind hoofs
On end he stands
That Arcite's legs, being higher than his head,
Seemed with strange art to hang. His victor's wreath
Even then fell off his head, and presently
Backward the jade comes o'er, and his full poise
Becomes the rider's load. Yet is he living,
But such a vessel 'tis that floats but for
The surge that next approaches. He much desires
To have some speech with you. Lo, he appears.
The gods are mighty, Arcite. If thy heart,
Thy worthy, manly heart, be yet unbroken,
Give me thy last words. I am Palamon,
One that yet loves thee dying.
And with her all the world's joy. Reach thy hand;
Farewell. I have told my last hour. I was false,
Yet never treacherous. Forgive me, cousin.
One kiss from fair Emilia.	
Take her. I die.	
Thou art a right good man, and while I live,
This day I give to tears.
In this place first you fought; e'en very here
Our thanks that you are living.
His part is played, and though it were too short,
He did it well. Your day is lengthened, and
The blissful dew of heaven does arrouse you.
The powerful Venus well hath graced her altar,
And given you your love. Our master, Mars,
Hath vouched his oracle, and to Arcite gave
The grace of the contention. So the deities
Have showed due justice.--Bear this hence.
That we should things desire which do cost us
The loss of our desire, that naught could buy
Dear love but loss of dear love.
Did play a subtler game. The conquered triumphs;
The victor has the loss; yet in the passage
The gods have been most equal.--Palamon,
Your kinsman hath confessed the right o' th' lady
Did lie in you, for you first saw her and
Even then proclaimed your fancy. He restored her
As your stol'n jewel and desired your spirit
To send him hence forgiven. The gods my justice
Take from my hand and they themselves become
The executioners. Lead your lady off,
And call your lovers from the stage of death,
Whom I adopt my friends. A day or two
Let us look sadly, and give grace unto
The funeral of Arcite, in whose end
The visages of bridegrooms we'll put on
And smile with Palamon--for whom an hour,
But one hour since, I was as dearly sorry
As glad of Arcite, and am now as glad
As for him sorry. O you heavenly charmers,
What things you make of us! For what we lack
We laugh, for what we have are sorry, still
Are children in some kind. Let us be thankful
For that which is, and with you leave dispute
That are above our question. Let's go off
And bear us like the time.
But, as it is with schoolboys, cannot say.
And let me look upon you. No man smile?
Then it goes hard, I see. He that has
Loved a young handsome wench, then, show his
Against his conscience let him hiss and kill
Our market. 'Tis in vain, I see, to stay you.
Have at the worst can come, then! Now what say
And yet mistake me not: I am not bold.
We have no such cause. If the tale we have told--
For 'tis no other--any way content you--
For to that honest purpose it was meant you--
We have our end; and you shall have ere long,
Your old loves to us. We, and all our might,
Rest at your service. Gentlemen, good night.
Enter a Shipmaster and a Boatswain.]
Master's whistle.--Blow till thou burst thy wind, if
Play the men.
Keep your cabins. You do assist the storm.
Trouble us not.
Fate, to his hanging. Make the rope of his destiny
Bring her to try wi' th' main course. 
Yet again? What do you here? Shall we give o'er and
Off to sea again! Lay her off!
This wide-chopped rascal--would thou
If by your art, my dearest father, you have
Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.
The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch,
But that the sea, mounting to th' welkin's cheek,
Dashes the fire out. O, I have suffered
With those that I saw suffer! A brave vessel,
Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her,
Dashed all to pieces. O, the cry did knock
Against my very heart! Poor souls, they perished.
Had I been any god of power, I would
Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere
It should the good ship so have swallowed, and
The fraughting souls within her.
No more amazement. Tell your piteous heart
There's no harm done.
Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter, who
Art ignorant of what thou art, naught knowing
Of whence I am, nor that I am more better
Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell,
And thy no greater father.
Did never meddle with my thoughts.
And pluck my magic garment from me.
So,
Lie there, my art.--Wipe thou thine eyes. Have
The direful spectacle of the wrack, which touched
The very virtue of compassion in thee,
So safely ordered that there is no soul--
No, not so much perdition as an hair,
Betid to any creature in the vessel
Which thou heard'st cry, which thou saw'st sink. Sit
For thou must now know farther.	
Begun to tell me what I am, but stopped
And left me to a bootless inquisition,
Concluding "Stay. Not yet."
The very minute bids thee ope thine ear.
Obey, and be attentive. Canst thou remember
Out three years old.
By what? By any other house or person?
Of anything the image tell me that
Hath kept with thy remembrance.
And rather like a dream than an assurance
That my remembrance warrants. Had I not
Four or five women once that tended me?
Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it
That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else
In the dark backward and abysm of time?
If thou rememb'rest aught ere thou cam'st here,
How thou cam'st here thou mayst.
Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,
Thy father was the Duke of Milan and
Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and
She said thou wast my daughter. And thy father
Was Duke of Milan, and his only heir
And princess no worse issued.
What foul play had we that we came from thence?
Or blessed was 't we did?
By foul play, as thou sayst, were we heaved thence,
But blessedly holp hither.
To think o' th' teen that I have turned you to,
Which is from my remembrance. Please you,
My brother and thy uncle, called Antonio--
Be so perfidious!--he whom next thyself
Of all the world I loved, and to him put
The manage of my state, as at that time
Through all the signories it was the first,
And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed
In dignity, and for the liberal arts
Without a parallel. Those being all my study,
The government I cast upon my brother
And to my state grew stranger, being transported
And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle--
Dost thou attend me?
Being once perfected how to grant suits,
How to deny them, who t' advance, and who
To trash for overtopping, new created
The creatures that were mine, I say, or changed 'em,
Or else new formed 'em, having both the key
Of officer and office, set all hearts i' th' state
To what tune pleased his ear, that now he was
The ivy which had hid my princely trunk
And sucked my verdure out on 't. Thou attend'st not.
To closeness and the bettering of my mind
With that which, but by being so retired,
Awaked an evil nature, and my trust,
Like a good parent, did beget of him
As my trust was, which had indeed no limit,
Not only with what my revenue yielded
But what my power might else exact, like one
Who, having into truth by telling of it,
Made such a sinner of his memory
To credit his own lie, he did believe
He was indeed the Duke, out o' th' substitution
And executing th' outward face of royalty
With all prerogative. Hence, his ambition growing--
Dost thou hear?
Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.
To have no screen between this part he played
And him he played it for, he needs will be
Absolute Milan. Me, poor man, my library
Was dukedom large enough. Of temporal royalties
He thinks me now incapable; confederates,
So dry he was for sway, wi' th' King of Naples
To give him annual tribute, do him homage,
Subject his coronet to his crown, and bend
The dukedom, yet unbowed--alas, poor Milan!--
To most ignoble stooping.
Mark his condition and th' event. Then tell me
If this might be a brother.
To think but nobly of my grandmother.
Good wombs have borne bad sons.
This King of Naples, being an enemy
To me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit,
Which was that he, in lieu o' th' premises
Of homage and I know not how much tribute,
Should presently extirpate me and mine
Out of the dukedom, and confer fair Milan,
With all the honors, on my brother; whereon,
Fated to th' purpose did Antonio open
The gates of Milan, and i' th' dead of darkness
The ministers for th' purpose hurried thence
Me and thy crying self.
Will cry it o'er again. It is a hint
That wrings mine eyes to 't.
And then I'll bring thee to the present business
Which now 's upon 's, without the which this story
Were most impertinent.
That hour destroy us?
My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not,
So dear the love my people bore me, nor set
With colors fairer painted their foul ends.
In few, they hurried us aboard a bark,
Bore us some leagues to sea, where they prepared
Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats
Instinctively have quit it. There they hoist us
To cry to th' sea that roared to us, to sigh
To th' winds, whose pity, sighing back again,
Did us but loving wrong.
Was I then to you!
Thou wast that did preserve me. Thou didst smile,
Infused with a fortitude from heaven,
When I have decked the sea with drops full salt,
Under my burden groaned, which raised in me
An undergoing stomach to bear up
Against what should ensue.
Some food we had, and some fresh water, that
Out of his charity, who being then appointed
Master of this design, did give us, with
Rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries,
Which since have steaded much. So, of his
Knowing I loved my books, he furnished me
From mine own library with volumes that
But ever see that man.
Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.
Here in this island we arrived, and here
Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
Than other princes can, that have more time
For vainer hours and tutors not so careful.
Heavens thank you for 't. And now I pray you, sir--
For still 'tis beating in my mind--your reason
For raising this sea storm?
By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune,
Now my dear lady, hath mine enemies
Brought to this shore; and by my prescience
If now I court not, but omit, my fortunes
Will ever after droop. Here cease more questions.
Thou art inclined to sleep. 'Tis a good dullness,
And give it way. I know thou canst not choose.
Come away, servant, come. I am ready now.
Approach, my Ariel. Come.
All hail, great master! Grave sir, hail! I come
To answer thy best pleasure. Be 't to fly,
To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
On the curled clouds, to thy strong bidding task
Ariel and all his quality.
Performed to point the tempest that I bade thee?
Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,
And burn in many places. On the topmast,
The yards, and bowsprit would I flame distinctly,
Then meet and join. Jove's lightning, the precursors
And sight-outrunning were not. The fire and cracks
Of sulfurous roaring the most mighty Neptune
Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble,
Yea, his dread trident shake.
Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil
Would not infect his reason?
But felt a fever of the mad, and played
Some tricks of desperation. All but mariners
Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel,
Then all afire with me. The King's son, Ferdinand,
With hair up-staring--then like reeds, not hair--
Was the first man that leaped; cried "Hell is empty,
And all the devils are here."
But was not this nigh shore?
But are they, Ariel, safe?
On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
But fresher than before; and, as thou bad'st me,
In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle.
The King's son have I landed by himself,
Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs
In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting,
His arms in this sad knot.	
The mariners say how thou hast disposed,
And all the rest o' th' fleet.
Is the King's ship. In the deep nook, where once
Thou called'st me up at midnight to fetch dew
From the still-vexed Bermoothes, there she's hid;
The mariners all under hatches stowed,
Who, with a charm joined to their suffered labor,
Which I dispersed, they all have met again
And are upon the Mediterranean float,
Bound sadly home for Naples,
Supposing that they saw the King's ship wracked
And his great person perish.
Exactly is performed. But there's more work.
What is the time o' th' day?
At least two glasses. The time 'twixt six and now
Must by us both be spent most preciously.
Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,
Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,
Which is not yet performed me.
What is 't thou canst demand?
Before the time be out? No more.
Remember I have done thee worthy service,
Told thee no lies, made no mistakings, served
Without or grudge or grumblings. Thou did promise
To bate me a full year.
From what a torment I did free thee?
Thou dost, and think'st it much to tread the ooze
Of the salt deep,
To run upon the sharp wind of the North,
To do me business in the veins o' th' Earth
When it is baked with frost.
Thou liest, malignant thing. Hast thou forgot
The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy
Was grown into a hoop? Hast thou forgot her?
Thou hast. Where was she born? Speak. Tell me.
Sir, in Argier.
Once in a month recount what thou hast been,
Which thou forget'st. This damned witch Sycorax,
For mischiefs manifold, and sorceries terrible
To enter human hearing, from Argier,
Thou know'st, was banished. For one thing she did
They would not take her life. Is not this true?
This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child
And here was left by th' sailors. Thou, my slave,
As thou report'st thyself, was then her servant,
And for thou wast a spirit too delicate
To act her earthy and abhorred commands,
Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee,
By help of her more potent ministers
And in her most unmitigable rage,
Into a cloven pine, within which rift
Imprisoned thou didst painfully remain
And left thee there, where thou didst vent thy groans
As fast as mill wheels strike. Then was this island
Dull thing, I say so; he, that Caliban
Whom now I keep in service. Thou best know'st
What torment I did find thee in. Thy groans
Did make wolves howl, and penetrate the breasts
Of ever-angry bears. It was a torment
To lay upon the damned, which Sycorax
Could not again undo. It was mine art,
When I arrived and heard thee, that made gape
The pine and let thee out.
If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an oak
And peg thee in his knotty entrails till
Thou hast howled away twelve winters.
And do my spriting gently.
What shall I do? Say, what? What shall I do?
Go make thyself like a nymph o' th' sea. Be subject
To no sight but thine and mine, invisible
To every eyeball else. Go, take this shape,
And hither come in 't. Go, hence with diligence!
Awake, dear heart, awake. Thou hast slept well.
Awake.	
Heaviness in me.
We'll visit Caliban, my slave, who never
Yields us kind answer.
We cannot miss him. He does make our fire,
Fetch in our wood, and serves in offices
That profit us.--What ho, slave, Caliban!
Thou earth, thou, speak!
Come forth, I say. There's other business for thee.
Come, thou tortoise. When?
Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,
Hark in thine ear.	
Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself
Upon thy wicked dam, come forth!
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brushed
With raven's feather from unwholesome fen
Drop on you both. A southwest blow on you
And blister you all o'er.
For this, be sure, tonight thou shalt have cramps,
Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up. Urchins
Shall forth at vast of night that they may work
All exercise on thee. Thou shalt be pinched
As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging
Than bees that made 'em.
This island's mine by Sycorax, my mother,
Which thou tak'st from me. When thou cam'st first,
Thou strok'st me and made much of me, wouldst
Water with berries in 't, and teach me how
To name the bigger light and how the less,
That burn by day and night. And then I loved thee,
And showed thee all the qualities o' th' isle,
The fresh springs, brine pits, barren place and
Cursed be I that did so! All the charms
Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you,
For I am all the subjects that you have,
Which first was mine own king; and here you sty me
In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me
The rest o' th' island.
Whom stripes may move, not kindness, I have used
Filth as thou art, with humane care, and lodged
In mine own cell, till thou didst seek to violate
The honor of my child.
Thou didst prevent me. I had peopled else
This isle with Calibans.
Which any print of goodness wilt not take,
Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee,
Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each
One thing or other. When thou didst not, savage,
Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like
With words that made them known. But thy vile
Though thou didst learn, had that in 't which good
Could not abide to be with. Therefore wast thou
Deservedly confined into this rock,
Who hadst deserved more than a prison.
You taught me language, and my profit on 't
Is I know how to curse. The red plague rid you
For learning me your language!
Fetch us in fuel; and be quick, thou 'rt best,
To answer other business. Shrugg'st thou, malice?
If thou neglect'st or dost unwillingly
What I command, I'll rack thee with old cramps,
Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar
That beasts shall tremble at thy din.
It would control my dam's god, Setebos,
And make a vassal of him.
Song.
Where should this music be? I' th' air, or th' earth?
It sounds no more; and sure it waits upon
Some god o' th' island. Sitting on a bank,
Weeping again the King my father's wrack,
This music crept by me upon the waters,
Allaying both their fury and my passion
With its sweet air. Thence I have followed it,
Or it hath drawn me rather. But 'tis gone.
No, it begins again.
Song.
The ditty does remember my drowned father.
This is no mortal business, nor no sound
That the Earth owes. I hear it now above me.
The fringed curtains of thine eye advance
And say what thou seest yond.
Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,
It carries a brave form. But 'tis a spirit.
No, wench, it eats and sleeps and hath such senses
As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest
Was in the wrack; and, but he's something stained
With grief--that's beauty's canker--thou might'st
And strays about to find 'em.
As my soul prompts it.  Spirit, fine spirit,
Within two days for this.
On whom these airs attend!--Vouchsafe my prayer
May know if you remain upon this island,
And that you will some good instruction give
How I may bear me here. My prime request,
Which I do last pronounce, is--O you wonder!--
If you be maid or no.
But certainly a maid.
Were I but where 'tis spoken.
What wert thou if the King of Naples heard thee?
To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me,
And that he does I weep. Myself am Naples,
Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld
The King my father wracked.
Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of Milan
And his brave son being twain.
And his more braver daughter could control thee,
If now 'twere fit to do 't. At the first sight
They have changed eyes.--Delicate Ariel,
Why speaks my father so ungently? This
Is the third man that e'er I saw, the first
That e'er I sighed for. Pity move my father
To be inclined my way.
And your affection not gone forth, I'll make you
The Queen of Naples.
Make the prize light.  One word
That thou attend me. Thou dost here usurp
The name thou ow'st not, and hast put thyself
Upon this island as a spy, to win it
From me, the lord on 't.
There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple.
If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
Good things will strive to dwell with 't.
Sea water shalt thou drink. Thy food shall be
The fresh-brook mussels, withered roots, and husks
Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.
Mine enemy has more power.
Make not too rash a trial of him, for
He's gentle and not fearful.
My foot my tutor?--Put thy sword up, traitor,
Who mak'st a show, but dar'st not strike, thy
Is so possessed with guilt. Come from thy ward,
For I can here disarm thee with this stick
And make thy weapon drop.
Hence! Hang not on my garments.
Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What,
An advocate for an impostor? Hush.
Thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he,
Having seen but him and Caliban. Foolish wench,
To th' most of men this is a Caliban,
And they to him are angels.
Are then most humble. I have no ambition
To see a goodlier man.
Thy nerves are in their infancy again
And have no vigor in them.
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wrack of all my friends, nor this man's threats
To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Behold this maid. All corners else o' th' Earth
Let liberty make use of. Space enough
Have I in such a prison.
Thou hast done well, fine Ariel.--Follow me.
My father's of a better nature, sir,
Than he appears by speech. This is unwonted
Which now came from him.
As mountain winds; but then exactly do
All points of my command.
Come follow.  Speak not for him.
Francisco, and others.]
Beseech you, sir, be merry. You have cause--
So have we all--of joy, for our escape
Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
Is common; every day some sailor's wife,
The masters of some merchant, and the merchant
Have just our theme of woe. But for the miracle--
Can speak like us. Then wisely, good sir, weigh
Our sorrow with our comfort.
By and by it will strike.
Tunis.
Good Lord, how you take it!
Tunis.
Tunis at the marriage of your daughter, who is now
You cram these words into mine ears against
The stomach of my sense. Would I had never
Married my daughter there, for coming thence
My son is lost, and, in my rate, she too,
Who is so far from Italy removed
Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
Hath made his meal on thee?
And ride upon their backs. He trod the water,
Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
The surge most swoll'n that met him. His bold head
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
To th' shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bowed,
As stooping to relieve him. I not doubt
He came alive to land.
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,
That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
But rather lose her to an African,
Where she at least is banished from your eye,
Who hath cause to wet the grief on 't.
You were kneeled to and importuned otherwise
By all of us; and the fair soul herself
Weighed between loathness and obedience at
Which end o' th' beam should bow. We have lost
More widows in them of this business' making
Than we bring men to comfort them.
The fault's your own.
The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness
And time to speak it in. You rub the sore
When you should bring the plaster.
It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
When you are cloudy.
Had I plantation of this isle, my lord--
He'd sow 't with nettle seed.
And were the king on 't, what would I do?
Execute all things, for no kind of traffic
Would I admit; no name of magistrate;
Letters should not be known; riches, poverty,
And use of service, none; contract, succession,
Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none;
No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil;
No occupation; all men idle, all,
And women too, but innocent and pure;
No sovereignty--
All things in common nature should produce
Without sweat or endeavor; treason, felony,
Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine
Would I not have; but nature should bring forth
Of its own kind all foison, all abundance,
To feed my innocent people.
Long live Gonzalo!
Prithee, no more. Thou dost talk nothing to me.
For I am very heavy.
Antonio, and Sebastian.]
What, all so soon asleep? I wish mine eyes
Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts. I find
They are inclined to do so.
Do not omit the heavy offer of it.
It seldom visits sorrow; when it doth,
It is a comforter.
Will guard your person while you take your rest,
And watch your safety.
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!
It is the quality o' th' climate.
Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find
Not myself disposed to sleep.
They fell together all, as by consent.
They dropped as by a thunderstroke. What might,
Worthy Sebastian, O, what might--? No more.
And yet methinks I see it in thy face
What thou shouldst be. Th' occasion speaks thee, and
My strong imagination sees a crown
Dropping upon thy head.
Do you not hear me speak?
It is a sleepy language, and thou speak'st
Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say?
This is a strange repose, to be asleep
With eyes wide open--standing, speaking, moving--
And yet so fast asleep.
Thou let'st thy fortune sleep, die rather, wink'st
Whiles thou art waking.
There's meaning in thy snores.
Must be so too, if heed me; which to do
Trebles thee o'er.
Hereditary sloth instructs me.
If you but knew how you the purpose cherish
Whiles thus you mock it, how in stripping it
You more invest it. Ebbing men indeed
Most often do so near the bottom run
By their own fear or sloth.
The setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim
Which throes thee much to yield.
Although this lord of weak remembrance--this,
Who shall be of as little memory
When he is earthed--hath here almost persuaded--
For he's a spirit of persuasion, only
Professes to persuade--the King his son's alive,
As he that sleeps here swims.
That he's undrowned.
What great hope have you! No hope that way is
Another way so high a hope that even
Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond,
But doubt discovery there. Will you grant with me
That Ferdinand is drowned?
Who's the next heir of Naples?
She that is Queen of Tunis; she that dwells
Ten leagues beyond man's life; she that from Naples
Can have no note, unless the sun were post--
The man i' th' moon's too slow--till newborn chins
Be rough and razorable; she that from whom
We all were sea-swallowed, though some cast again,
And by that destiny to perform an act
Whereof what's past is prologue, what to come
In yours and my discharge.
So is she heir of Naples, 'twixt which regions
There is some space.
Seems to cry out "How shall that Claribel
Measure us back to Naples? Keep in Tunis
And let Sebastian wake." Say this were death
That now hath seized them, why, they were no worse
Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples
As well as he that sleeps, lords that can prate
As amply and unnecessarily
As this Gonzalo. I myself could make
The mind that I do, what a sleep were this
For your advancement! Do you understand me?
Methinks I do.
Tender your own good fortune?
You did supplant your brother Prospero.
And look how well my garments sit upon me,
Much feater than before. My brother's servants
Were then my fellows; now they are my men.
Ay, sir, where lies that? If 'twere a kibe,
This deity in my bosom. Twenty consciences
That stand 'twixt me and Milan, candied be they
And melt ere they molest! Here lies your brother,
No better than the earth he lies upon.
If he were that which now he's like--that's dead--
Whom I with this obedient steel, three inches of it,
Can lay to bed forever; whiles you, doing thus,
To the perpetual wink for aye might put
This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who
Should not upbraid our course. For all the rest,
They'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk.
They'll tell the clock to any business that
We say befits the hour.
Shall be my precedent: as thou got'st Milan,
Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest,
And I the King shall love thee.
And when I rear my hand, do you the like
To fall it on Gonzalo.	
My master through his art foresees the danger
That you, his friend, are in, and sends me forth--
For else his project dies--to keep them living.
King!	
Why, how now, ho! Awake? Why are you drawn?
Wherefore this ghastly looking?
Whiles we stood here securing your repose,
Even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing
Like bulls, or rather lions. Did 't not wake you?
It struck mine ear most terribly.
To make an earthquake. Sure, it was the roar
Of a whole herd of lions.
Upon mine honor, sir, I heard a humming,
And that a strange one too, which did awake me.
That's verily. 'Tis best we stand upon our guard,
Or that we quit this place. Let's draw our weapons.
Lead off this ground, and let's make further search
For my poor son.
For he is, sure, i' th' island.
Prospero my lord shall know what I have done.
So, king, go safely on to seek thy son.
All the infections that the sun sucks up
From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall and make him
By inchmeal a disease! His spirits hear me,
And yet I needs must curse. But they'll nor pinch,
Fright me with urchin-shows, pitch me i' th' mire,
Nor lead me like a firebrand in the dark
Out of my way, unless he bid 'em. But
For every trifle are they set upon me,
Sometimes like apes, that mow and chatter at me
And after bite me; then like hedgehogs, which
Lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount
Their pricks at my footfall. Sometime am I
All wound with adders, who with cloven tongues
Do hiss me into madness. Lo, now, lo!
Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me
For bringing wood in slowly. I'll fall flat.
Perchance he will not mind me.
What have we here, a man or a fish? Dead or
This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's funeral.
Well, here's my comfort.	
This is a scurvy tune too. But here's my comfort.
Ha? I have not scaped drowning to be afeard now
Stephano breathes at' nostrils.
Here is that which will give language to you, cat.
Open your mouth. This will shake your shaking, I
But art thou not drowned, Stephano? I
Stephano? O Stephano, two Neapolitans scaped!
Though thou canst swim like a duck, thou art made
My mistress showed me thee, and thy dog, and thy
Thou wondrous man.
And I with my long nails will dig thee pignuts,
Show thee a jay's nest, and instruct thee how
To snare the nimble marmoset. I'll bring thee
To clustering filberts, and sometimes I'll get thee
Young scamels from the rock. Wilt thou go with me?
Freedom, high-day! High-day, freedom! Freedom,
There be some sports are painful, and their labor
Delight in them sets off; some kinds of baseness
Are nobly undergone; and most poor matters
Point to rich ends. This my mean task
Would be as heavy to me as odious, but
The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead
And makes my labors pleasures. O, she is
Ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed,
And he's composed of harshness. I must remove
Some thousands of these logs and pile them up,
Upon a sore injunction. My sweet mistress
Weeps when she sees me work, and says such
Had never like executor. I forget;
But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labors,
Most busiest when I do it.
Work not so hard. I would the lightning had
Burnt up those logs that you are enjoined to pile.
Pray, set it down and rest you. When this burns
Is hard at study. Pray now, rest yourself.
He's safe for these three hours.
The sun will set before I shall discharge
What I must strive to do.
Than you should such dishonor undergo
While I sit lazy by.
As well as it does you, and I should do it
With much more ease, for my good will is to it,
And yours it is against.
This visitation shows it.
No, noble mistress, 'tis fresh morning with me
When you are by at night. I do beseech you,
Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers,
What is your name?
Indeed the top of admiration, worth
What's dearest to the world! Full many a lady
Th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
Brought my too diligent ear. For several virtues
Have I liked several women, never any
With so full soul but some defect in her
Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed,
And put it to the foil. But you, O you,
So perfect and so peerless, are created
Of every creature's best.
One of my sex, no woman's face remember,
Save, from my glass, mine own. Nor have I seen
More that I may call men than you, good friend,
And my dear father. How features are abroad
The jewel in my dower, I would not wish
Any companion in the world but you,
Nor can imagination form a shape
Besides yourself to like of. But I prattle
Something too wildly, and my father's precepts
This wooden slavery than to suffer
The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak:
The very instant that I saw you did
My heart fly to your service, there resides
To make me slave to it, and for your sake
Am I this patient log-man.
And crown what I profess with kind event
If I speak true; if hollowly, invert
What best is boded me to mischief. I,
Beyond all limit of what else i' th' world,
Do love, prize, honor you.
To weep at what I am glad of.
Of two most rare affections. Heavens rain grace
On that which breeds between 'em!
At mine unworthiness, that dare not offer
What I desire to give, and much less take
What I shall die to want. But this is trifling,
And all the more it seeks to hide itself,
The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning,
And prompt me, plain and holy innocence.
If not, I'll die your maid. To be your fellow
You may deny me, but I'll be your servant
Whether you will or no.
My mistress, dearest, and I thus humble ever.
My husband, then?
As bondage e'er of freedom. Here's my hand.
And mine, with my heart in 't. And now farewell
Till half an hour hence.
So glad of this as they I cannot be,
Who are surprised withal; but my rejoicing
At nothing can be more. I'll to my book,
For yet ere suppertime must I perform
Much business appertaining.
They say there's but five upon this isle; we are three
Thy eyes are almost set in thy head.
If you prove a mutineer, the next tree. The poor
From me he got it. If thy Greatness will,
Revenge it on him, for I know thou dar'st,
But this thing dare not.
Thou shalt be lord of it, and I'll serve thee.
Yea, yea, my lord. I'll yield him thee asleep,
Where thou mayst knock a nail into his head.
What a pied ninny's this!--Thou scurvy patch!--
And take his bottle from him. When that's gone,
He shall drink naught but brine, for I'll not show him
Where the quick freshes are.
As you like this, give me the lie another time.
Prithee, stand further off.
Beat him enough. After a little time
Why, as I told thee, 'tis a custom with him
Having first seized his books, or with a log
Batter his skull, or paunch him with a stake,
Or cut his weasand with thy knife. Remember
First to possess his books, for without them
He's but a sot, as I am, nor hath not
One spirit to command. They all do hate him
As rootedly as I. Burn but his books.
He has brave utensils--for so he calls them--
Which, when he has a house, he'll deck withal.
And that most deeply to consider is
The beauty of his daughter. He himself
Calls her a nonpareil. I never saw a woman
But only Sycorax my dam and she;
But she as far surpasseth Sycorax
As great'st does least.
Ay, lord, she will become thy bed, I warrant,
And bring thee forth brave brood.
But while thou liv'st, keep a good tongue in thy
Within this half hour will he be asleep.
Wilt thou destroy him then?
Thou mak'st me merry. I am full of pleasure.
Let us be jocund. Will you troll the catch
You taught me but whilere?
Mercy upon us!
Be not afeard. The isle is full of noises,
Sounds and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not.
Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments
Will hum about mine ears, and sometimes voices
That, if I then had waked after long sleep,
Will make me sleep again; and then, in dreaming,
The clouds methought would open, and show riches
Ready to drop upon me, that when I waked
Francisco, etc.]
By 'r lakin, I can go no further, sir.
My old bones aches. Here's a maze trod indeed
Through forthrights and meanders. By your
Who am myself attached with weariness
To th' dulling of my spirits. Sit down and rest.
Even here I will put off my hope and keep it
No longer for my flatterer. He is drowned
Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks
Our frustrate search on land. Well, let him go.
Do not, for one repulse, forgo the purpose
That you resolved t' effect.
Will we take throughly.
For now they are oppressed with travel, they
Will not nor cannot use such vigilance
As when they are fresh.
What harmony is this? My good friends, hark.
Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?
That there are unicorns, that in Arabia
There is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix
At this hour reigning there.
And what does else want credit, come to me
And I'll be sworn 'tis true. Travelers ne'er did lie,
Though fools at home condemn 'em.
If I should say I saw such islanders--
For, certes, these are people of the island--
Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet note
Their manners are more gentle, kind, than of
Our human generation you shall find
Many, nay, almost any.
Thou hast said well, for some of you there present
Are worse than devils.
Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound,
Although they want the use of tongue--a kind
Of excellent dumb discourse.
They have left their viands behind, for we have
Will 't please you taste of what is here?
Faith, sir, you need not fear. When we were boys,
Who would believe that there were mountaineers
Dewlapped like bulls, whose throats had hanging at
Wallets of flesh? Or that there were such men
Whose heads stood in their breasts? Which now we
Each putter-out of five for one will bring us
Good warrant of.
Although my last, no matter, since I feel
The best is past. Brother, my lord the Duke,
Stand to, and do as we.
You are three men of sin, whom Destiny,
That hath to instrument this lower world
And what is in 't, the never-surfeited sea
Hath caused to belch up you, and on this island,
Where man doth not inhabit, you 'mongst men
Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad;
And even with such-like valor, men hang and drown
Their proper selves.
You fools, I and my fellows
Are ministers of Fate. The elements
Of whom your swords are tempered may as well
Wound the loud winds or with bemocked-at stabs
Kill the still-closing waters as diminish
One dowl that's in my plume. My fellow ministers
Are like invulnerable. If you could hurt,
Your swords are now too massy for your strengths
And will not be uplifted. But remember--
For that's my business to you--that you three
From Milan did supplant good Prospero,
Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it,
Him and his innocent child, for which foul deed,
The powers--delaying, not forgetting--have
Incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures
Against your peace. Thee of thy son, Alonso,
They have bereft; and do pronounce by me
Ling'ring perdition, worse than any death
Can be at once, shall step by step attend
You and your ways, whose wraths to guard you
Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls
Upon your heads--is nothing but heart's sorrow
And a clear life ensuing.	
Bravely the figure of this Harpy hast thou
Performed, my Ariel. A grace it had, devouring.
Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated
In what thou hadst to say. So, with good life
And observation strange, my meaner ministers
Their several kinds have done. My high charms
And these mine enemies are all knit up
In their distractions. They now are in my power;
And in these fits I leave them while I visit
Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drowned,
And his and mine loved darling.	
In this strange stare?
Methought the billows spoke and told me of it;
The winds did sing it to me, and the thunder,
That deep and dreadful organ pipe, pronounced
The name of Prosper. It did bass my trespass.
Therefor my son i' th' ooze is bedded, and
And with him there lie mudded.	
All three of them are desperate. Their great guilt,
Like poison given to work a great time after,
Now 'gins to bite the spirits. I do beseech you
That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly
And hinder them from what this ecstasy
May now provoke them to.
If I have too austerely punished you,
Your compensation makes amends, for I
Have given you here a third of mine own life,
Or that for which I live; who once again
Were but my trials of thy love, and thou
Hast strangely stood the test. Here afore heaven
Do not smile at me that I boast of her,
For thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise
And make it halt behind her.
Against an oracle.
Then, as my gift and thine own acquisition
Worthily purchased, take my daughter. But
If thou dost break her virgin-knot before
All sanctimonious ceremonies may
With full and holy rite be ministered,
No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall
To make this contract grow; but barren hate,
Sour-eyed disdain, and discord shall bestrew
The union of your bed with weeds so loathly
That you shall hate it both. Therefore take heed,
As Hymen's lamps shall light you.
For quiet days, fair issue, and long life,
With such love as 'tis now, the murkiest den,
The most opportune place, the strong'st suggestion
Our worser genius can shall never melt
Mine honor into lust to take away
The edge of that day's celebration
When I shall think or Phoebus' steeds are foundered
Or night kept chained below.
Sit then and talk with her. She is thine own.
What, Ariel, my industrious servant, Ariel!
What would my potent master? Here I am.
Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service
Did worthily perform, and I must use you
In such another trick. Go bring the rabble,
Incite them to quick motion, for I must
Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple
Some vanity of mine art. It is my promise,
And they expect it from me.
Dearly, my delicate Ariel. Do not approach
Till thou dost hear me call.
Look thou be true; do not give dalliance
Too much the rein. The strongest oaths are straw
To th' fire i' th' blood. Be more abstemious,
Or else goodnight your vow.
The white cold virgin snow upon my heart
Abates the ardor of my liver.
Now come, my Ariel. Bring a corollary
Rather than want a spirit. Appear, and pertly.
No tongue. All eyes. Be silent.
Ceres, most bounteous lady, thy rich leas
Of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats, and peas;
Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep,
And flat meads thatched with stover, them to keep;
Thy banks with pioned and twilled brims,
Which spongy April at thy hest betrims
To make cold nymphs chaste crowns; and thy
Whose shadow the dismissed bachelor loves,
Being lass-lorn; thy poll-clipped vineyard,
And thy sea marge, sterile and rocky hard,
Where thou thyself dost air--the Queen o' th' sky,
Whose wat'ry arch and messenger am I,
Bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign grace,
Here on this grass-plot, in this very place,
To come and sport. Her peacocks fly amain.
Approach, rich Ceres, her to entertain.
Hail, many-colored messenger, that ne'er
Dost disobey the wife of Jupiter;
Who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers
Diffusest honey drops, refreshing showers;
And with each end of thy blue bow dost crown
My bosky acres and my unshrubbed down,
Rich scarf to my proud Earth. Why hath thy queen
Summoned me hither to this short-grassed green?
And some donation freely to estate
On the blest lovers.
If Venus or her son, as thou dost know,
Do now attend the Queen? Since they did plot
The means that dusky Dis my daughter got,
Her and her blind boy's scandaled company
Be not afraid. I met her deity
Cutting the clouds towards Paphos, and her son
Dove-drawn with her. Here thought they to have
Some wanton charm upon this man and maid,
Whose vows are that no bed-right shall be paid
Till Hymen's torch be lighted--but in vain.
Mars's hot minion is returned again;
Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows,
Swears he will shoot no more, but play with
And be a boy right out.
Great Juno, comes. I know her by her gait.
How does my bounteous sister? Go with me
To bless this twain, that they may prosperous be
And honored in their issue.
This is a most majestic vision, and
Harmonious charmingly. May I be bold
To think these spirits?
My present fancies.
So rare a wondered father and a wise
Makes this place paradise.
Juno and Ceres whisper seriously.
There's something else to do. Hush, and be mute,
Or else our spell is marred.
You nymphs, called naiads of the windring brooks,
With your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks,
Leave your crisp channels and on this green land
Answer your summons, Juno does command.
Come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate
You sunburned sicklemen, of August weary,
Come hither from the furrow and be merry.
Make holiday: your rye-straw hats put on,
And these fresh nymphs encounter every one
In country footing.
Of the beast Caliban and his confederates
Against my life. The minute of their plot
Is almost come.--Well done. Avoid. No more.
This is strange. Your father's in some passion
That works him strongly.
Saw I him touched with anger, so distempered.
You do look, my son, in a moved sort,
As if you were dismayed. Be cheerful, sir.
Our revels now are ended. These our actors,
As I foretold you, were all spirits and
Are melted into air, into thin air;
And like the baseless fabric of this vision,
The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces,
The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuff
As dreams are made on, and our little life
Is rounded with a sleep. Sir, I am vexed.
Bear with my weakness. My old brain is troubled.
Be not disturbed with my infirmity.
If you be pleased, retire into my cell
And there repose. A turn or two I'll walk
To still my beating mind.
Come with a thought. I thank thee, Ariel. Come.
Thy thoughts I cleave to. What's thy pleasure?
We must prepare to meet with Caliban.
Ay, my commander. When I presented Ceres,
Lest I might anger thee.
Say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?
So full of valor that they smote the air
For breathing in their faces, beat the ground
For kissing of their feet; yet always bending
Towards their project. Then I beat my tabor,
At which, like unbacked colts, they pricked their
Advanced their eyelids, lifted up their noses
As they smelt music. So I charmed their ears
That, calf-like, they my lowing followed through
Toothed briers, sharp furzes, pricking gorse, and
Which entered their frail shins. At last I left them
There dancing up to th' chins, that the foul lake
Thy shape invisible retain thou still.
The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither
For stale to catch these thieves.
Nurture can never stick; on whom my pains,
Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost;
And as with age his body uglier grows,
So his mind cankers. I will plague them all
Even to roaring.
Come, hang them on this line.
Prospero and Ariel look on.]
Good my lord, give me thy favor still.
Be patient, for the prize I'll bring thee to
Shall hoodwink this mischance. Therefore speak
All's hushed as midnight yet.
Prithee, my king, be quiet. Seest thou here,
This is the mouth o' th' cell. No noise, and enter.
Do that good mischief which may make this island
Thine own forever, and I, thy Caliban,
For aye thy foot-licker.
Let it alone, thou fool. It is but trash.
Stephano!
The dropsy drown this fool! What do you mean
To dote thus on such luggage? Let 't alone,
And do the murder first. If he awake,
From toe to crown he'll fill our skins with pinches,
Make us strange stuff.
Now is the jerkin under the line.--Now, jerkin, you
And all be turned to barnacles or to apes
With foreheads villainous low.
Fury, Fury! There, Tyrant, there! Hark, hark!
Go, charge my goblins that they grind their joints
With dry convulsions, shorten up their sinews
With aged cramps, and more pinch-spotted make
Than pard or cat o' mountain.
Let them be hunted soundly. At this hour
Lies at my mercy all mine enemies.
Shortly shall all my labors end, and thou
Shalt have the air at freedom. For a little
Follow and do me service.
Now does my project gather to a head.
My charms crack not, my spirits obey, and time
Goes upright with his carriage.--How's the day?
On the sixth hour, at which time, my lord,
You said our work should cease.
When first I raised the tempest. Say, my spirit,
How fares the King and 's followers?
In the same fashion as you gave in charge,
Just as you left them; all prisoners, sir,
In the line grove which weather-fends your cell.
They cannot budge till your release. The King,
His brother, and yours abide all three distracted,
And the remainder mourning over them,
Brimful of sorrow and dismay; but chiefly
Him that you termed, sir, the good old Lord
Gonzalo.
His tears runs down his beard like winter's drops
From eaves of reeds. Your charm so strongly works
That if you now beheld them, your affections
Would become tender.
Mine would, sir, were I human.
Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling
Of their afflictions, and shall not myself,
One of their kind, that relish all as sharply
Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art?
Though with their high wrongs I am struck to th'
Yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury
Do I take part. The rarer action is
In virtue than in vengeance. They being penitent,
The sole drift of my purpose doth extend
Not a frown further. Go, release them, Ariel.
My charms I'll break, their senses I'll restore,
And they shall be themselves.
You elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes, and groves,
And you that on the sands with printless foot
Do chase the ebbing Neptune, and do fly him
When he comes back; you demi-puppets that
By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make,
Whereof the ewe not bites; and you whose pastime
Is to make midnight mushrumps, that rejoice
To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid,
Weak masters though you be, I have bedimmed
The noontide sun, called forth the mutinous winds,
And 'twixt the green sea and the azured vault
Set roaring war; to the dread rattling thunder
Have I given fire, and rifted Jove's stout oak
With his own bolt; the strong-based promontory
Have I made shake, and by the spurs plucked up
The pine and cedar; graves at my command
Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let 'em forth
By my so potent art. But this rough magic
Some heavenly music, which even now I do,
To work mine end upon their senses that
This airy charm is for, I'll break my staff,
Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,
And deeper than did ever plummet sound
To an unsettled fancy, cure thy brains,
Now useless, boiled within thy skull. There stand,
For you are spell-stopped.--
Holy Gonzalo, honorable man,
Mine eyes, e'en sociable to the show of thine,
Fall fellowly drops.--The charm dissolves apace,
And as the morning steals upon the night,
Melting the darkness, so their rising senses
Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle
Their clearer reason.--O good Gonzalo,
My true preserver and a loyal sir
To him thou follow'st, I will pay thy graces
Home, both in word and deed.--Most cruelly
Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter.
Thy brother was a furtherer in the act.--
Thou art pinched for 't now, Sebastian.--Flesh and
You, brother mine, that entertained ambition,
Expelled remorse and nature, whom, with Sebastian,
Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong,
Would here have killed your king, I do forgive thee,
Unnatural though thou art.--Their understanding
Begins to swell, and the approaching tide
Will shortly fill the reasonable shore
That now lies foul and muddy. Not one of them
That yet looks on me or would know me.--Ariel,
Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell.
As I was sometime Milan.--Quickly, spirit,
Thou shalt ere long be free.
Why, that's my dainty Ariel. I shall miss
Thee, but yet thou shalt have freedom. So, so, so.
To the King's ship, invisible as thou art.
There shalt thou find the mariners asleep
Under the hatches. The master and the boatswain
Being awake, enforce them to this place,
And presently, I prithee.
Or ere your pulse twice beat.	
All torment, trouble, wonder, and amazement
Inhabits here. Some heavenly power guide us
Out of this fearful country!
The wronged Duke of Milan, Prospero.
For more assurance that a living prince
Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body,
And to thee and thy company I bid
Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me
Beats as of flesh and blood; and since I saw thee,
Th' affliction of my mind amends, with which
An if this be at all, a most strange story.
Thy dukedom I resign, and do entreat
Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should
Prospero
Be living and be here?
Let me embrace thine age, whose honor cannot
Be measured or confined.
Or be not, I'll not swear.
Some subtleties o' th' isle, that will not let you
Believe things certain. Welcome, my friends all.
And justify you traitors. At this time
Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive
Thy rankest fault, all of them, and require
My dukedom of thee, which perforce I know
Thou must restore.
Give us particulars of thy preservation,
How thou hast met us here, whom three hours since
Were wracked upon this shore, where I have lost--
How sharp the point of this remembrance is!--
My dear son Ferdinand.
Irreparable is the loss, and patience
Says it is past her cure.
You have not sought her help, of whose soft grace,
For the like loss, I have her sovereign aid
And rest myself content.
As great to me as late, and supportable
To make the dear loss have I means much weaker
Than you may call to comfort you, for I
Have lost my daughter.
The King and Queen there! That they were, I wish
Myself were mudded in that oozy bed
Where my son lies!--When did you lose your
In this last tempest. I perceive these lords
At this encounter do so much admire
That they devour their reason, and scarce think
Their eyes do offices of truth, their words
Are natural breath.--But howsoe'er you have
Been justled from your senses, know for certain
That I am Prospero and that very duke
Which was thrust forth of Milan, who most
Upon this shore, where you were wracked, was
To be the lord on 't. No more yet of this.
For 'tis a chronicle of day by day,
Not a relation for a breakfast, nor
Befitting this first meeting.  Welcome, sir.
This cell's my court. Here have I few attendants,
And subjects none abroad. Pray you, look in.
My dukedom since you have given me again,
At least bring forth a wonder to content you
As much as me my dukedom.
Sweet lord, you play me false.
Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle,
And I would call it fair play.
Shall I twice lose.
Though the seas threaten, they are merciful.
Of a glad father compass thee about!
Arise, and say how thou cam'st here.
How many goodly creatures are there here!
How beauteous mankind is! O, brave new world
That has such people in 't!
What is this maid with whom thou wast at play?
Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours.
Is she the goddess that hath severed us
And brought us thus together?
But by immortal providence she's mine.
For his advice, nor thought I had one. She
Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan,
Of whom so often I have heard renown,
But never saw before, of whom I have
Received a second life; and second father
This lady makes him to me.
But, O, how oddly will it sound that I
Must ask my child forgiveness!
Let us not burden our remembrances with
Or should have spoke ere this. Look down, you
And on this couple drop a blessed crown,
For it is you that have chalked forth the way
Which brought us hither.
Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue
Should become kings of Naples? O, rejoice
Beyond a common joy, and set it down
With gold on lasting pillars: in one voyage
Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis,
And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife
Where he himself was lost; Prospero his dukedom
In a poor isle; and all of us ourselves
When no man was his own.
Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart
That doth not wish you joy!
This fellow could not drown. Now, blasphemy,
That swear'st grace o'erboard, not an oath on
Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?
The best news is that we have safely found
Our king and company. The next: our ship,
Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split,
Is tight and yare and bravely rigged as when
We first put out to sea.
Have I done since I went.
These are not natural events. They strengthen
From strange to stranger.--Say, how came you
If I did think, sir, I were well awake,
And--how, we know not--all clapped under
Where, but even now, with strange and several
Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,
And more diversity of sounds, all horrible,
We were awaked, straightway at liberty,
Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld
Our royal, good, and gallant ship, our master
Cap'ring to eye her. On a trice, so please you,
Even in a dream were we divided from them
And were brought moping hither.
Bravely, my diligence. Thou shalt be free.
This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod,
And there is in this business more than nature
Was ever conduct of. Some oracle
Must rectify our knowledge.
Do not infest your mind with beating on
The strangeness of this business. At picked leisure,
Which shall be shortly, single I'll resolve you,
Which to you shall seem probable, of every
These happened accidents; till when, be cheerful
And think of each thing well. 
Come hither, spirit;
Set Caliban and his companions free.
Untie the spell.  How fares my gracious
There are yet missing of your company
Some few odd lads that you remember not.
Coraggio, bully monster, coraggio.
What things are these, my Lord Antonio?
Will money buy 'em?
Is a plain fish and no doubt marketable.
Mark but the badges of these men, my lords,
Then say if they be true. This misshapen knave,
His mother was a witch, and one so strong
That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs,
And deal in her command without her power.
These three have robbed me, and this demi-devil,
For he's a bastard one, had plotted with them
To take my life. Two of these fellows you
Must know and own. This thing of darkness I
Acknowledge mine.
Is not this Stephano, my drunken butler?
And Trinculo is reeling ripe. Where should they
Find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em?
This is as strange a thing as e'er I looked on.
He is as disproportioned in his manners
As in his shape.  Go, sirrah, to my cell.
Take with you your companions. As you look
To have my pardon, trim it handsomely.
Ay, that I will, and I'll be wise hereafter
And seek for grace. What a thrice-double ass
Was I to take this drunkard for a god,
And worship this dull fool!
Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.
Sir, I invite your Highness and your train
To my poor cell, where you shall take your rest
For this one night, which part of it I'll waste
With such discourse as, I not doubt, shall make it
Go quick away: the story of my life
And the particular accidents gone by
Since I came to this isle. And in the morn
Where I have hope to see the nuptial
Of these our dear-beloved solemnized,
And thence retire me to my Milan, where
Every third thought shall be my grave.
To hear the story of your life, which must
Take the ear strangely.
And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales,
And sail so expeditious that shall catch
Your royal fleet far off.  My Ariel,
That is thy charge. Then to the elements
Be free, and fare thou well.--Please you, draw near.
Now my charms are all o'erthrown,
And what strength I have 's mine own,
Which is most faint. Now 'tis true
Or sent to Naples. Let me not,
Since I have my dukedom got
And pardoned the deceiver, dwell
In this bare island by your spell,
But release me from my bands
With the help of your good hands.
Gentle breath of yours my sails
Must fill, or else my project fails,
Which was to please. Now I want
Spirits to enforce, art to enchant,
And my ending is despair,
Unless I be relieved by prayer,
Which pierces so that it assaults
Mercy itself, and frees all faults.
Old John of Gaunt, time-honored Lancaster,
Hast thou, according to thy oath and band,
Brought hither Henry Hereford, thy bold son,
Here to make good the boist'rous late appeal,
Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him
If he appeal the Duke on ancient malice
Or worthily, as a good subject should,
On some known ground of treachery in him?
As near as I could sift him on that argument,
On some apparent danger seen in him
Aimed at your Highness, no inveterate malice.
Then call them to our presence.
Face to face
And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear
The accuser and the accused freely speak.
High stomached are they both and full of ire,
In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.
Many years of happy days befall
My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege.
Each day still better other's happiness
Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,
Add an immortal title to your crown.
We thank you both. Yet one but flatters us,
As well appeareth by the cause you come:
Namely, to appeal each other of high treason.
Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
First--heaven be the record to my speech!--
In the devotion of a subject's love,
Tend'ring the precious safety of my prince
And free from other misbegotten hate,
Come I appellant to this princely presence.--
Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee;
And mark my greeting well, for what I speak
My body shall make good upon this earth
Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,
Too good to be so and too bad to live,
Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat,
And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move,
What my tongue speaks my right-drawn sword may
Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal.
The bitter clamor of two eager tongues,
Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain.
The blood is hot that must be cooled for this.
Yet can I not of such tame patience boast
As to be hushed and naught at all to say.
First, the fair reverence of your Highness curbs me
From giving reins and spurs to my free speech,
Which else would post until it had returned
These terms of treason doubled down his throat.
Setting aside his high blood's royalty,
And let him be no kinsman to my liege,
Call him a slanderous coward and a villain,
Which to maintain I would allow him odds
And meet him, were I tied to run afoot
Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps
Or any other ground inhabitable
Wherever Englishman durst set his foot.
Meantime let this defend my loyalty:
By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.
Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,
Disclaiming here the kindred of the King,
And lay aside my high blood's royalty,
Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.
If guilty dread have left thee so much strength
As to take up mine honor's pawn, then stoop.
By that and all the rites of knighthood else
Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,
What I have spoke or thou canst worse devise.
Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,
Or chivalrous design of knightly trial;
And when I mount, alive may I not light
If I be traitor or unjustly fight.
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?
It must be great that can inherit us
So much as of a thought of ill in him.
Look what I speak, my life shall prove it true:
That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles
In name of lendings for your Highness' soldiers,
The which he hath detained for lewd employments,
Like a false traitor and injurious villain.
Besides I say, and will in battle prove,
Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge
That ever was surveyed by English eye,
That all the treasons for these eighteen years
Complotted and contrived in this land
Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and
Further I say, and further will maintain
Upon his bad life to make all this good,
That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death,
Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,
And consequently, like a traitor coward,
Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of
Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries
Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth
To me for justice and rough chastisement.
And, by the glorious worth of my descent,
This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.
How high a pitch his resolution soars!--
Thomas of Norfolk, what sayst thou to this?
And bid his ears a little while be deaf,
Till I have told this slander of his blood
How God and good men hate so foul a liar.
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears.
Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,
As he is but my father's brother's son,
Now by my scepter's awe I make a vow:
Such neighbor nearness to our sacred blood
Should nothing privilege him nor partialize
The unstooping firmness of my upright soul.
He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou.
Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.
Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,
Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.
Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais
Disbursed I duly to his Highness' soldiers;
The other part reserved I by consent,
For that my sovereign liege was in my debt
Upon remainder of a dear account
Since last I went to France to fetch his queen.
Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester's death,
Neglected my sworn duty in that case.--
For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,
The honorable father to my foe,
Once did I lay an ambush for your life,
But ere I last received the sacrament,
Your Grace's pardon, and I hope I had it.--
This is my fault. As for the rest appealed,
It issues from the rancor of a villain,
Which in myself I boldly will defend,
And interchangeably hurl down my gage
Upon this overweening traitor's foot,
To prove myself a loyal gentleman,
Even in the best blood chambered in his bosom;
In haste whereof most heartily I pray
Your Highness to assign our trial day.
Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me.
Let's purge this choler without letting blood.
This we prescribe, though no physician.
Deep malice makes too deep incision.
Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed.
Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.--
Good uncle, let this end where it begun;
We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.
To be a make-peace shall become my age.--
Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.
And, Norfolk, throw down his.
Obedience bids I should not bid again.
Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.
Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.
My life thou shalt command, but not my shame.
The one my duty owes, but my fair name,
Despite of death that lives upon my grave,
To dark dishonor's use thou shalt not have.
Pierced to the soul with slander's venomed spear,
The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood
Which breathed this poison.
Give me his gage. Lions make leopards tame.
Yea, but not change his spots. Take but my shame
And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord,
The purest treasure mortal times afford
Is spotless reputation; that away,
Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
Mine honor is my life; both grow in one.
Take honor from me and my life is done.
Then, dear my liege, mine honor let me try.
In that I live, and for that will I die.
Cousin, throw up your gage. Do you begin.
Shall I seem crestfallen in my father's sight?
Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height
Before this out-dared dastard? Ere my tongue
Shall wound my honor with such feeble wrong
Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear
The slavish motive of recanting fear
And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
Where shame doth harbor, even in Mowbray's face.
We were not born to sue, but to command,
Which, since we cannot do, to make you friends,
Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,
At Coventry upon Saint Lambert's day.
There shall your swords and lances arbitrate
The swelling difference of your settled hate.
Since we cannot atone you, we shall see
Justice design the victor's chivalry.--
Lord Marshal, command our officers-at-arms
Be ready to direct these home alarms.
Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood
Doth more solicit me than your exclaims
To stir against the butchers of his life.
But since correction lieth in those hands
Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven,
Who, when they see the hours ripe on Earth,
Will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.
Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one,
Were as seven vials of his sacred blood
Or seven fair branches springing from one root.
Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,
Some of those branches by the Destinies cut.
But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,
One vial full of Edward's sacred blood,
One flourishing branch of his most royal root,
Is cracked and all the precious liquor spilt,
Is hacked down, and his summer leaves all faded,
By envy's hand and murder's bloody ax.
Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! That bed, that
That metal, that self mold that fashioned thee
Made him a man; and though thou livest and
Yet art thou slain in him. Thou dost consent
In some large measure to thy father's death
In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
Who was the model of thy father's life.
Call it not patience, Gaunt. It is despair.
In suff'ring thus thy brother to be slaughtered,
Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,
Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee.
That which in mean men we entitle patience
Is pale, cold cowardice in noble breasts.
What shall I say? To safeguard thine own life,
The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.
God's is the quarrel; for God's substitute,
His deputy anointed in His sight,
Hath caused his death, the which if wrongfully
Let heaven revenge, for I may never lift
An angry arm against His minister.
Where, then, alas, may I complain myself?
To God, the widow's champion and defense.
Why then I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.
Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold
Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight.
That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast!
Or if misfortune miss the first career,
Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom
That they may break his foaming courser's back
And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
Farewell, old Gaunt. Thy sometime brother's wife
With her companion, grief, must end her life.
Sister, farewell. I must to Coventry.
As much good stay with thee as go with me.
Yet one word more. Grief boundeth where it falls,
Not with the empty hollowness, but weight.
For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.
Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.
Lo, this is all. Nay, yet depart not so!
Though this be all, do not so quickly go;
With all good speed at Plashy visit me.
Alack, and what shall good old York there see
But empty lodgings and unfurnished walls,
Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
Therefore commend me; let him not come there
To seek out sorrow that dwells everywhere.
Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die.
The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.
My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford armed?
Yea, at all points, and longs to enter in.
The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.
Why then, the champions are prepared and stay
For nothing but his Majesty's approach.
Duke of Norfolk in arms, defendant, with a Herald.]
Marshal, demand of yonder champion
The cause of his arrival here in arms,
Ask him his name, and orderly proceed
To swear him in the justice of his cause.
In God's name and the King's, say who thou art
And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,
Against what man thou com'st, and what thy quarrel.
Speak truly on thy knighthood and thy oath,
As so defend thee heaven and thy valor.
My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
Who hither come engaged by my oath--
Which God defend a knight should violate!--
Both to defend my loyalty and truth
To God, my king, and my succeeding issue,
Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me,
And by the grace of God and this mine arm
To prove him, in defending of myself,
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.
Hereford, appellant, in armor, with a Herald.]
Both who he is and why he cometh hither
Thus plated in habiliments of war,
And formally, according to our law,
Depose him in the justice of his cause.
What is thy name? And wherefore com'st thou hither,
Before King Richard in his royal lists?
Against whom comest thou? And what's thy quarrel?
Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby
Am I, who ready here do stand in arms
To prove, by God's grace and my body's valor,
In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
That he is a traitor foul and dangerous
To God of heaven, King Richard, and to me.
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.
On pain of death, no person be so bold
Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,
Except the Marshal and such officers
Appointed to direct these fair designs.
Lord Marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand
And bow my knee before his Majesty;
For Mowbray and myself are like two men
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage.
Then let us take a ceremonious leave
And loving farewell of our several friends.
The appellant in all duty greets your Highness
And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.
We will descend and fold him in our arms.
Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,
So be thy fortune in this royal fight.
Farewell, my blood--which, if today thou shed,
Lament we may but not revenge thee dead.
For me if I be gored with Mowbray's spear.
As confident as is the falcon's flight
Against a bird do I with Mowbray fight.
My loving lord, I take my leave of you.--
Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle;
Not sick, although I have to do with death,
But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.--
Lo, as at English feasts, so I regreet
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet.
Whose youthful spirit in me regenerate
Doth with a twofold vigor lift me up
To reach at victory above my head,
Add proof unto mine armor with thy prayers,
And with thy blessings steel my lance's point
That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat
And furbish new the name of John o' Gaunt,
Even in the lusty havior of his son.
God in thy good cause make thee prosperous.
Be swift like lightning in the execution,
And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,
Fall like amazing thunder on the casque
Of thy adverse pernicious enemy.
Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant, and live.
Mine innocence and Saint George to thrive!
However God or fortune cast my lot,
There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne,
Never did captive with a freer heart
Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace
His golden uncontrolled enfranchisement
More than my dancing soul doth celebrate
This feast of battle with mine adversary.
Most mighty liege and my companion peers,
Take from my mouth the wish of happy years.
As gentle and as jocund as to jest
Go I to fight. Truth hath a quiet breast.
Farewell, my lord. Securely I espy
Virtue with valor couched in thine eye.--
Order the trial, marshal, and begin.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
Receive thy lance; and God defend the right.
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry "Amen!"
Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby
Stands here for God, his sovereign, and himself,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
And dares him to set forward to the fight.
Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
Both to defend himself and to approve
Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby
To God, his sovereign, and to him disloyal,
Courageously and with a free desire
Attending but the signal to begin.
Sound, trumpets, and set forward, combatants.
Stay! The King hath thrown his warder down.
Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,
And both return back to their chairs again.
While we return these dukes what we decree.
And list what with our council we have done.
For that our kingdom's earth should not be soiled
With that dear blood which it hath fostered;
And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
Of civil wounds plowed up with neighbor's sword;
And for we think the eagle-winged pride
Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,
With rival-hating envy, set on you
To wake our peace, which in our country's cradle
Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep,
Which, so roused up with boist'rous untuned
With harsh resounding trumpets' dreadful bray,
And grating shock of wrathful iron arms,
Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace
And make us wade even in our kindred's blood:
Therefore we banish you our territories.
You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,
Till twice five summers have enriched our fields
Shall not regreet our fair dominions,
But tread the stranger paths of banishment.
Your will be done. This must my comfort be:
That sun that warms you here shall shine on me,
And those his golden beams to you here lent
Shall point on me and gild my banishment.
Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
Which I with some unwillingness pronounce:
The sly, slow hours shall not determinate
The dateless limit of thy dear exile.
The hopeless word of "never to return"
Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.
And all unlooked-for from your Highness' mouth.
As to be cast forth in the common air,
Have I deserved at your Highness' hands.
The language I have learnt these forty years,
My native English, now I must forgo;
And now my tongue's use is to me no more
Than an unstringed viol or a harp,
Or like a cunning instrument cased up,
Or, being open, put into his hands
That knows no touch to tune the harmony.
Within my mouth you have enjailed my tongue,
Doubly portcullised with my teeth and lips,
And dull unfeeling barren ignorance
Is made my jailor to attend on me.
Too far in years to be a pupil now.
What is thy sentence then but speechless death,
Which robs my tongue from breathing native
It boots thee not to be compassionate.
After our sentence plaining comes too late.
Then thus I turn me from my country's light,
To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.
Return again, and take an oath with thee.
Richard's sword.]
Swear by the duty that you owe to God--
Our part therein we banish with yourselves--
To keep the oath that we administer:
You never shall, so help you truth and God,
Embrace each other's love in banishment,
Nor never look upon each other's face,
Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile
This louring tempest of your homebred hate,
Nor never by advised purpose meet
To plot, contrive, or complot any ill
Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:
By this time, had the King permitted us,
One of our souls had wandered in the air,
Banished this frail sepulcher of our flesh,
As now our flesh is banished from this land.
Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm.
Since thou hast far to go, bear not along
The clogging burden of a guilty soul.
No, Bolingbroke; if ever I were traitor,
My name be blotted from the book of life,
And I from heaven banished as from hence.
But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know,
And all too soon, I fear, the King shall rue.--
Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray;
Save back to England, all the world's my way.
Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
Hath from the number of his banished years
Plucked four away.  Six frozen
Return with welcome home from banishment.
How long a time lies in one little word!
Four lagging winters and four wanton springs
End in a word; such is the breath of kings.
He shortens four years of my son's exile.
But little vantage shall I reap thereby;
For, ere the six years that he hath to spend
Can change their moons and bring their times
My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light
Shall be extinct with age and endless night;
My inch of taper will be burnt and done,
And blindfold death not let me see my son.
Why, uncle, thou hast many years to live.
But not a minute, king, that thou canst give.
Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,
And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow.
Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,
But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage.
Thy word is current with him for my death,
But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.
Thy son is banished upon good advice,
Whereto thy tongue a party verdict gave.
Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?
Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.
You urged me as a judge, but I had rather
You would have bid me argue like a father.
To smooth his fault I should have been more mild.
And in the sentence my own life destroyed.
Alas, I looked when some of you should say
But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue
Against my will to do myself this wrong.
Cousin, farewell.--And, uncle, bid him so.
Six years we banish him, and he shall go.
Cousin, farewell. What presence must not know,
From where you do remain let paper show.
My lord, no leave take I, for I will ride,
As far as land will let me, by your side.
That thou returnest no greeting to thy friends?
When the tongue's office should be prodigal
To breathe the abundant dolor of the heart.
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.
Joy absent, grief is present for that time.
What is six winters? They are quickly gone.
To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.
Call it a travel that thou tak'st for pleasure.
My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,
Which finds it an enforced pilgrimage.
The sullen passage of thy weary steps
Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set
The precious jewel of thy home return.
Nay, rather every tedious stride I make
Will but remember me what a deal of world
Must I not serve a long apprenticehood
To foreign passages, and in the end,
Having my freedom, boast of nothing else
But that I was a journeyman to grief?
All places that the eye of heaven visits
Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
Teach thy necessity to reason thus:
There is no virtue like necessity.
Think not the King did banish thee,
But thou the King. Woe doth the heavier sit
Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.
Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honor,
And not the King exiled thee; or suppose
Devouring pestilence hangs in our air
And thou art flying to a fresher clime.
Look what thy soul holds dear, imagine it
To lie that way thou goest, not whence thou com'st.
Suppose the singing birds musicians,
The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence
The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more
Than a delightful measure or a dance;
For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite
The man that mocks at it and sets it light.
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
By bare imagination of a feast?
Or wallow naked in December snow
By thinking on fantastic summer's heat?
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse.
Fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more
Than when he bites but lanceth not the sore.
Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way.
Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.
Then, England's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu,
My mother and my nurse that bears me yet.
Where'er I wander, boast of this I can,
Though banished, yet a trueborn Englishman.
How far brought you high Hereford on his way?
But to the next highway, and there I left him.
And say, what store of parting tears were shed?
Faith, none for me, except the northeast wind,
Which then blew bitterly against our faces,
Awaked the sleeping rheum and so by chance
Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
What said our cousin when you parted with him?
And, for my heart disdained that my tongue
Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
To counterfeit oppression of such grief
That words seemed buried in my sorrow's grave.
Marry, would the word "farewell" have lengthened
And added years to his short banishment,
He should have had a volume of farewells.
But since it would not, he had none of me.
He is our cousin, cousin, but 'tis doubt,
When time shall call him home from banishment,
Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.
Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green,
Observed his courtship to the common people,
How he did seem to dive into their hearts
With humble and familiar courtesy,
What reverence he did throw away on slaves,
Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles
And patient underbearing of his fortune,
As 'twere to banish their affects with him.
Off goes his bonnet to an oysterwench;
And had the tribute of his supple knee,
With "Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends,"
As were our England in reversion his
And he our subjects' next degree in hope.
Well, he is gone, and with him go these thoughts.
Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,
Expedient manage must be made, my liege,
Ere further leisure yield them further means
For their advantage and your Highness' loss.
We will ourself in person to this war.
And, for our coffers, with too great a court
And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,
We are enforced to farm our royal realm,
The revenue whereof shall furnish us
For our affairs in hand. If that come short,
Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters,
Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold
And send them after to supply our wants,
For we will make for Ireland presently.
Bushy, what news?
Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,
Suddenly taken, and hath sent posthaste
To entreat your Majesty to visit him.
Now put it, God, in the physician's mind
To help him to his grave immediately!
The lining of his coffers shall make coats
To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him.
Pray God we may make haste and come too late.
Attendants.]
Will the King come, that I may breathe my last
In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?
Vex not yourself nor strive not with your breath,
For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.
Enforce attention like deep harmony.
Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in
For they breathe truth that breathe their words in
He that no more must say is listened more
More are men's ends marked than their lives before.
As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,
Writ in remembrance more than things long past.
Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear,
My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.
No, it is stopped with other flattering sounds,
As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond;
Lascivious meters, to whose venom sound
The open ear of youth doth always listen;
Report of fashions in proud Italy,
Whose manners still our tardy-apish nation
Limps after in base imitation.
Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity--
So it be new, there's no respect how vile--
That is not quickly buzzed into his ears?
Then all too late comes counsel to be heard
Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard.
Direct not him whose way himself will choose.
Methinks I am a prophet new inspired
And thus expiring do foretell of him:
His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,
For violent fires soon burn out themselves;
Small showers last long, but sudden storms are
He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;
With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder;
Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,
Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.
This royal throne of kings, this sceptered isle,
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
This other Eden, demi-paradise,
This fortress built by Nature for herself
Against infection and the hand of war,
This happy breed of men, this little world,
This precious stone set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall
Or as a moat defensive to a house,
Against the envy of less happier lands,
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this
England,
This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,
Feared by their breed and famous by their birth,
Renowned for their deeds as far from home
For Christian service and true chivalry
As is the sepulcher in stubborn Jewry
Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's son,
This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,
Dear for her reputation through the world,
Is now leased out--I die pronouncing it--
Like to a tenement or pelting farm.
England, bound in with the triumphant sea,
Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege
Of wat'ry Neptune, is now bound in with shame,
With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds.
That England that was wont to conquer others
Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.
Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,
How happy then were my ensuing death!
Ross, Willoughby, etc.]
The King is come. Deal mildly with his youth,
For young hot colts being reined do rage the more.
How fares our noble uncle Lancaster?
What comfort, man? How is 't with aged Gaunt?
Old Gaunt indeed and gaunt in being old.
Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast,
And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?
For sleeping England long time have I watched;
Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt.
The pleasure that some fathers feed upon
Is my strict fast--I mean my children's looks--
And, therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt.
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
Whose hollow womb inherits naught but bones.
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?
No, misery makes sport to mock itself.
Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,
Should dying men flatter with those that live?
No, no, men living flatter those that die.
Thou, now a-dying, sayest thou flatterest me.
Now He that made me knows I see thee ill,
Ill in myself to see, and in thee, seeing ill.
Thy deathbed is no lesser than thy land,
Wherein thou liest in reputation sick;
And thou, too careless-patient as thou art,
Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure
Of those physicians that first wounded thee.
Whose compass is no bigger than thy head,
And yet encaged in so small a verge,
The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.
Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons,
From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,
Deposing thee before thou wert possessed,
Which art possessed now to depose thyself.
Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,
It were a shame to let this land by lease;
But, for thy world enjoying but this land,
Is it not more than shame to shame it so?
Landlord of England art thou now, not king.
Thy state of law is bondslave to the law,
And thou--
Presuming on an ague's privilege,
Darest with thy frozen admonition
Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood
With fury from his native residence.
Now, by my seat's right royal majesty,
Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,
This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head
Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.
For that I was his father Edward's son!
That blood already, like the pelican,
Hast thou tapped out and drunkenly caroused.
My brother Gloucester--plain, well-meaning soul,
Whom fair befall in heaven 'mongst happy souls--
May be a precedent and witness good
That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood.
Join with the present sickness that I have,
And thy unkindness be like crooked age
To crop at once a too-long withered flower.
Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!
These words hereafter thy tormentors be!--
Convey me to my bed, then to my grave.
Love they to live that love and honor have.
And let them die that age and sullens have,
For both hast thou, and both become the grave.
To wayward sickliness and age in him.
He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear
As Harry, Duke of Hereford, were he here.
Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his;
As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.
My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your Majesty.
What says he?
His tongue is now a stringless instrument;
Words, life, and all, old Lancaster hath spent.
Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!
Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.
The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he;
His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be.
So much for that. Now for our Irish wars:
We must supplant those rough rugheaded kern,
Which live like venom where no venom else
But only they have privilege to live.
And, for these great affairs do ask some charge,
Towards our assistance we do seize to us
The plate, coin, revenues, and movables
Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possessed.
How long shall I be patient? Ah, how long
Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment,
Nor Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs,
Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke
About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,
Have ever made me sour my patient cheek
Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face.
Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first.
In war was never lion raged more fierce,
In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,
Than was that young and princely gentleman.
His face thou hast, for even so looked he,
Accomplished with the number of thy hours;
But when he frowned, it was against the French
And not against his friends. His noble hand
Did win what he did spend, and spent not that
Which his triumphant father's hand had won.
His hands were guilty of no kindred blood,
But bloody with the enemies of his kin.
Or else he never would compare between.
Why, uncle, what's the matter?
Pardon me if you please. If not, I, pleased
Not to be pardoned, am content withal.
Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands
The royalties and rights of banished Hereford?
Is not Gaunt dead? And doth not Hereford live?
Was not Gaunt just? And is not Harry true?
Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
Is not his heir a well-deserving son?
Take Hereford's rights away, and take from time
His charters and his customary rights;
Let not tomorrow then ensue today;
Be not thyself; for how art thou a king
But by fair sequence and succession?
Now afore God--God forbid I say true!--
If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights,
Call in the letters patents that he hath
By his attorneys general to sue
His livery, and deny his offered homage,
You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,
You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts,
And prick my tender patience to those thoughts
Which honor and allegiance cannot think.
Think what you will, we seize into our hands
His plate, his goods, his money, and his lands.
What will ensue hereof there's none can tell;
But by bad courses may be understood
That their events can never fall out good.	
Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight.
Bid him repair to us to Ely House
To see this business. Tomorrow next
We will for Ireland, and 'tis time, I trow.
And we create, in absence of ourself,
Our uncle York Lord Governor of England,
For he is just and always loved us well.--
Come on, our queen. Tomorrow must we part.
Be merry, for our time of stay is short.
Northumberland, Willoughby, and Ross remain.]
Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.
And living too, for now his son is duke.
Barely in title, not in revenues.
Richly in both, if justice had her right.
My heart is great, but it must break with silence
Ere 't be disburdened with a liberal tongue.
Nay, speak thy mind, and let him ne'er speak more
That speaks thy words again to do thee harm!
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of
Hereford?
If it be so, out with it boldly, man.
Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
No good at all that I can do for him,
Unless you call it good to pity him,
Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.
Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne
In him, a royal prince, and many more
Of noble blood in this declining land.
The King is not himself, but basely led
By flatterers; and what they will inform
Merely in hate 'gainst any of us all,
That will the King severely prosecute
The commons hath he pilled with grievous taxes,
And quite lost their hearts. The nobles hath he fined
For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.
And daily new exactions are devised,
As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what.
But what i' God's name doth become of this?
Wars hath not wasted it, for warred he hath not,
But basely yielded upon compromise
That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows.
More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.
The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.
The King grown bankrupt like a broken man.
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.
He hath not money for these Irish wars,
His burdenous taxations notwithstanding,
But by the robbing of the banished duke.
His noble kinsman. Most degenerate king!
But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
Yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm;
We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,
And yet we strike not, but securely perish.
We see the very wrack that we must suffer,
And unavoided is the danger now
For suffering so the causes of our wrack.
Not so. Even through the hollow eyes of death
How near the tidings of our comfort is.
Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.
Be confident to speak, Northumberland.
We three are but thyself, and speaking so
Thy words are but as thoughts. Therefore be bold.
Then thus: I have from Le Port Blanc,
That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord
Cobham,
That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,
His brother, archbishop late of Canterbury,
Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston,
Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton, and Francis
Coint--
All these well furnished by the Duke of Brittany
With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,
Are making hither with all due expedience
And shortly mean to touch our northern shore.
Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay
The first departing of the King for Ireland.
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
Imp out our drooping country's broken wing,
Redeem from broking pawn the blemished crown,
Wipe off the dust that hides our scepter's gilt,
And make high majesty look like itself,
Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh.
But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
Stay and be secret, and myself will go.
To horse, to horse! Urge doubts to them that fear.
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.
Madam, your Majesty is too much sad.
You promised, when you parted with the King,
To lay aside life-harming heaviness
And entertain a cheerful disposition.
To please the King I did; to please myself
Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,
Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest
As my sweet Richard. Yet again methinks
Some unborn sorrow ripe in Fortune's womb
Is coming towards me, and my inward soul
With nothing trembles. At some thing it grieves
More than with parting from my lord the King.
Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows
Which shows like grief itself but is not so;
For sorrow's eyes, glazed with blinding tears,
Divides one thing entire to many objects,
Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon
Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry
Distinguish form. So your sweet Majesty,
Looking awry upon your lord's departure,
Find shapes of grief more than himself to wail,
Which, looked on as it is, is naught but shadows
Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious queen,
More than your lord's departure weep not. More is
Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye,
Which for things true weeps things imaginary.
It may be so, but yet my inward soul
Persuades me it is otherwise. Howe'er it be,
As thought, on thinking on no thought I think,
Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.
From some forefather grief. Mine is not so,
For nothing hath begot my something grief--
Or something hath the nothing that I grieve.
But what it is that is not yet known what,
God save your Majesty!--And well met, gentlemen.
Why hopest thou so? 'Tis better hope he is,
For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope.
Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipped?
That he, our hope, might have retired his power
And driven into despair an enemy's hope,
Who strongly hath set footing in this land.
The banished Bolingbroke repeals himself
And with uplifted arms is safe arrived
At Ravenspurgh.
Ah, madam, 'tis too true. And that is worse,
The Lord Northumberland, his son young Harry
Percy,
The Lords of Ross, Beaumont, and Willoughby,
With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.
Why have you not proclaimed Northumberland
And all the rest revolted faction traitors?
We have; whereupon the Earl of Worcester
Hath broken his staff, resigned his stewardship,
And all the Household servants fled with him
To Bolingbroke.
So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,
And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir.
Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,
And I, a gasping new-delivered mother,
Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow joined.
Despair not, madam.
With cozening hope. He is a flatterer,
Who gently would dissolve the bands of life
Which false hope lingers in extremity.
With signs of war about his aged neck.
Uncle, for God's sake speak comfortable words.
Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts.
Comfort's in heaven, and we are on the Earth,
Where nothing lives but crosses, cares, and grief.
Your husband, he is gone to save far off
Whilst others come to make him lose at home.
Here am I left to underprop his land,
Who, weak with age, cannot support myself.
Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;
Now shall he try his friends that flattered him.
My lord, your son was gone before I came.
He was? Why, so go all which way it will.
The nobles they are fled; the commons they are
And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side.
Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;
Bid her send me presently a thousand pound.
Hold, take my ring.
My lord, I had forgot to tell your Lordship:
Today as I came by I called there--
But I shall grieve you to report the rest.
An hour before I came, the Duchess died.
God for His mercy, what a tide of woes
Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!
So my untruth had not provoked him to it,
The King had cut off my head with my brother's!
What, are there no posts dispatched for Ireland?
How shall we do for money for these wars?--
Come, sister--cousin I would say, pray pardon
Go, fellow, get thee home. Provide some carts
And bring away the armor that is there.
Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
If I know how or which way to order these affairs
Thus disorderly thrust into my hands,
Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen.
And duty bids defend; t' other again
Is my kinsman, whom the King hath wronged,
Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.
Well, somewhat we must do.  Come,
And meet me presently at Berkeley.
But time will not permit. All is uneven,
And everything is left at six and seven.
Bushy, Green, and Bagot remain.]
The wind sits fair for news to go for Ireland,
But none returns. For us to levy power
Proportionable to the enemy
Is all unpossible.
Besides, our nearness to the King in love
Is near the hate of those love not the King.
And that is the wavering commons, for their love
Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them
By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.
Wherein the King stands generally condemned.
If judgment lie in them, then so do we,
Because we ever have been near the King.
Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristow Castle.
The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.
Thither will I with you, for little office
Will the hateful commons perform for us,
Except like curs to tear us all to pieces.--
Will you go along with us?
No, I will to Ireland to his Majesty.
Farewell. If heart's presages be not vain,
We three here part that ne'er shall meet again.
That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.
Alas, poor duke, the task he undertakes
Is numb'ring sands and drinking oceans dry.
Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.
Well, we may meet again.
Northumberland.]
How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?
These high wild hills and rough uneven ways
Draws out our miles and makes them wearisome.
And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,
Making the hard way sweet and delectable.
But I bethink me what a weary way
From Ravenspurgh to Cotshall will be found
In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,
Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled
The tediousness and process of my travel.
But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have
The present benefit which I possess,
And hope to joy is little less in joy
Than hope enjoyed. By this the weary lords
Shall make their way seem short as mine hath done
By sight of what I have, your noble company.
Of much less value is my company
Than your good words. But who comes here?
Sent from my brother Worcester whencesoever.--
Harry, how fares your uncle?
No, my good lord, he hath forsook the court,
Broken his staff of office, and dispersed
The Household of the King.
What was his reason? He was not so resolved
When last we spake together.
Because your Lordship was proclaimed traitor.
But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh
To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,
And sent me over by Berkeley to discover
What power the Duke of York had levied there,
Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.
Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?
No, my good lord, for that is not forgot
Which ne'er I did remember. To my knowledge
Then learn to know him now. This is the Duke.
My gracious lord, I tender you my service,
Such as it is, being tender, raw, and young,
Which elder days shall ripen and confirm
To more approved service and desert.
As in a soul rememb'ring my good friends;
And as my fortune ripens with thy love,
It shall be still thy true love's recompense.
My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.
How far is it to Berkeley, and what stir
Keeps good old York there with his men of war?
There stands the castle by yon tuft of trees,
Manned with three hundred men, as I have heard,
And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and
Seymour,
None else of name and noble estimate.
Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,
Bloody with spurring, fiery red with haste.
Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues
Is yet but unfelt thanks, which, more enriched,
Shall be your love and labor's recompense.
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.
And far surmounts our labor to attain it.
Evermore thank's the exchequer of the poor,
Which, till my infant fortune comes to years,
Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?
It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.
My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you.
My lord, my answer is--to "Lancaster";
And I am come to seek that name in England.
And I must find that title in your tongue
Before I make reply to aught you say.
Mistake me not, my lord, 'tis not my meaning
To rase one title of your honor out.
To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will,
From the most gracious regent of this land,
The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on
To take advantage of the absent time,
And fright our native peace with self-borne arms.
Here comes his Grace in person.	
My noble uncle.
Show me thy humble heart and not thy knee,
Whose duty is deceivable and false.
Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle.
In an ungracious mouth is but profane.
Why have those banished and forbidden legs
Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground?
But then, more why: why have they dared to march
So many miles upon her peaceful bosom,
Frighting her pale-faced villages with war
And ostentation of despised arms?
Com'st thou because the anointed king is hence?
Why, foolish boy, the King is left behind
And in my loyal bosom lies his power.
Were I but now lord of such hot youth
As when brave Gaunt thy father and myself
Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
From forth the ranks of many thousand French,
Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee
And minister correction to thy fault!
My gracious uncle, let me know my fault.
On what condition stands it and wherein?
Even in condition of the worst degree,
In gross rebellion and detested treason.
Thou art a banished man and here art come,
Before the expiration of thy time,
In braving arms against thy sovereign.
As I was banished, I was banished Hereford,
But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
And, noble uncle, I beseech your Grace
Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye.
You are my father, for methinks in you
Will you permit that I shall stand condemned
Plucked from my arms perforce and given away
To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born?
If that my cousin king be king in England,
It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster.
You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin.
Had you first died and he been thus trod down,
He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father
To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.
And yet my letters patents give me leave.
My father's goods are all distrained and sold,
And these, and all, are all amiss employed.
What would you have me do? I am a subject,
And I challenge law. Attorneys are denied me,
And therefore personally I lay my claim
To my inheritance of free descent.
The noble duke hath been too much abused.
It stands your Grace upon to do him right.
Base men by his endowments are made great.
My lords of England, let me tell you this:
And labored all I could to do him right.
But in this kind to come, in braving arms,
Be his own carver and cut out his way
To find out right with wrong, it may not be.
And you that do abet him in this kind
Cherish rebellion and are rebels all.
The noble duke hath sworn his coming is
But for his own, and for the right of that
We all have strongly sworn to give him aid.
And let him never see joy that breaks that oath.
Well, well. I see the issue of these arms.
Because my power is weak and all ill-left.
But if I could, by Him that gave me life,
Unto the sovereign mercy of the King.
But since I cannot, be it known unto you
Unless you please to enter in the castle
And there repose you for this night.
An offer, uncle, that we will accept.
But we must win your Grace to go with us
To Bristow Castle, which they say is held
By Bushy, Bagot, and their complices,
The caterpillars of the commonwealth,
Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.
It may be I will go with you; but yet I'll pause,
For I am loath to break our country's laws.
Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are.
Things past redress are now with me past care.
My Lord of Salisbury, we have stayed ten days
And hardly kept our countrymen together,
And yet we hear no tidings from the King.
Therefore we will disperse ourselves. Farewell.
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman.
The King reposeth all his confidence in thee.
The bay trees in our country are all withered,
And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;
The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the Earth,
And lean-looked prophets whisper fearful change;
Rich men look sad, and ruffians dance and leap,
The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,
The other to enjoy by rage and war.
These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.
Farewell. Our countrymen are gone and fled,
As well assured Richard their king is dead.
Ah, Richard! With the eyes of heavy mind
Fall to the base earth from the firmament.
Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west,
Witnessing storms to come, woe, and unrest.
Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes,
And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.
Northumberland, with other Lords, and Bushy and
Green prisoners.]
Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls,
Since presently your souls must part your bodies,
With too much urging your pernicious lives,
For 'twere no charity; yet to wash your blood
From off my hands, here in the view of men
You have misled a prince, a royal king,
By you unhappied and disfigured clean.
You have in manner with your sinful hours
Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him,
Broke the possession of a royal bed,
And stained the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks
With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs.
Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth,
Near to the King in blood, and near in love
Till you did make him misinterpret me,
Have stooped my neck under your injuries
And sighed my English breath in foreign clouds,
Eating the bitter bread of banishment,
Whilst you have fed upon my seigniories,
Disparked my parks and felled my forest woods,
From my own windows torn my household coat,
Rased out my imprese, leaving me no sign,
Save men's opinions and my living blood,
To show the world I am a gentleman.
This and much more, much more than twice all
Condemns you to the death.--See them delivered
To execution and the hand of death.
More welcome is the stroke of death to me
Than Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell.
My comfort is that heaven will take our souls
And plague injustice with the pains of hell.
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatched.	
For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated.
Tell her I send to her my kind commends.
Take special care my greetings be delivered.
With letters of your love to her at large.
Thanks, gentle uncle.--Come, lords, away,
To fight with Glendower and his complices.
Carlisle, and Soldiers.]
Barkloughly Castle call they this at hand?
Yea, my lord. How brooks your Grace the air
After your late tossing on the breaking seas?
Needs must I like it well. I weep for joy
To stand upon my kingdom once again.	
Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,
Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs.
As a long-parted mother with her child
Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting,
So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth,
And do thee favors with my royal hands.
Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth,
Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense,
But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom,
And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way,
Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet
Which with usurping steps do trample thee.
Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies,
And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,
Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder,
Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch
Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.
Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords.
This earth shall have a feeling, and these stones
Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king
Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.
Fear not, my lord. That power that made you king
Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.
The means that heavens yield must be embraced
And not neglected. Else heaven would,
And we will not--heaven's offer we refuse,
The proffered means of succor and redress.
He means, my lord, that we are too remiss,
Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,
Grows strong and great in substance and in power.
Discomfortable cousin, know'st thou not
That when the searching eye of heaven is hid
Behind the globe that lights the lower world,
Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen
In murders and in outrage boldly here?
But when from under this terrestrial ball
He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines
And darts his light through every guilty hole,
Then murders, treasons, and detested sins,
The cloak of night being plucked from off their
Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves.
So when this thief, this traitor Bolingbroke,
Who all this while hath reveled in the night
Whilst we were wand'ring with the Antipodes,
Shall see us rising in our throne, the east,
His treasons will sit blushing in his face,
Not able to endure the sight of day,
But self-affrighted, tremble at his sin.
Not all the water in the rough rude sea
Can wash the balm off from an anointed king.
The breath of worldly men cannot depose
The deputy elected by the Lord.
For every man that Bolingbroke hath pressed
To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,
God for His Richard hath in heavenly pay
Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.
Welcome, my lord. How far off lies your power?
Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,
Than this weak arm. Discomfort guides my tongue
And bids me speak of nothing but despair.
One day too late, I fear me, noble lord,
Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth.
And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men.
Today, today, unhappy day too late,
Overthrows thy joys, friends, fortune, and thy state;
For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead,
Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed, and fled.
Comfort, my liege. Why looks your Grace so pale?
But now the blood of twenty thousand men
And till so much blood thither come again
All souls that will be safe, fly from my side,
For time hath set a blot upon my pride.
Comfort, my liege. Remember who you are.
Awake, thou coward majesty, thou sleepest!
Is not the King's name twenty thousand names?
Arm, arm, my name! A puny subject strikes
At thy great glory. Look not to the ground,
You favorites of a king. Are we not high?
High be our thoughts. I know my Uncle York
Hath power enough to serve our turn.--But who
More health and happiness betide my liege
Than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him.
Mine ear is open and my heart prepared.
The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.
Say, is my kingdom lost? Why, 'twas my care,
And what loss is it to be rid of care?
Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?
Greater he shall not be. If he serve God,
We'll serve Him too and be his fellow so.
Revolt our subjects? That we cannot mend.
They break their faith to God as well as us.
Cry woe, destruction, ruin, and decay.
The worst is death, and death will have his day.
Glad am I that your Highness is so armed
To bear the tidings of calamity.
Like an unseasonable stormy day
Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores
As if the world were all dissolved to tears,
So high above his limits swells the rage
Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land
With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.
Whitebeards have armed their thin and hairless
Against thy Majesty; boys with women's voices
Strive to speak big and clap their female joints
In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown;
Thy very beadsmen learn to bend their bows
Of double-fatal yew against thy state.
Yea, distaff women manage rusty bills
Against thy seat. Both young and old rebel,
And all goes worse than I have power to tell.
Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill.
Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? Where is Bagot?
What is become of Bushy? Where is Green,
That they have let the dangerous enemy
Measure our confines with such peaceful steps?
If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it!
Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.
Dogs easily won to fawn on any man!
Snakes in my heart blood warmed, that sting my
Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas!
Would they make peace? Terrible hell
Make war upon their spotted souls for this!
Sweet love, I see, changing his property,
Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate.
Again uncurse their souls. Their peace is made
With heads and not with hands. Those whom you
Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound
And lie full low, graved in the hollow ground.
Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?
Ay, all of them at Bristow lost their heads.
Where is the Duke my father with his power?
No matter where. Of comfort no man speak.
Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs,
Make dust our paper, and with rainy eyes
Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth.
Let's choose executors and talk of wills.
And yet not so, for what can we bequeath
Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
Our lands, our lives, and all are Bolingbroke's,
And nothing can we call our own but death
And that small model of the barren earth
Which serves as paste and cover to our bones.
For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground
And tell sad stories of the death of kings--
How some have been deposed, some slain in war,
Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed,
Some poisoned by their wives, some sleeping killed,
All murdered. For within the hollow crown
That rounds the mortal temples of a king
Keeps Death his court, and there the antic sits,
Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp,
Allowing him a breath, a little scene,
To monarchize, be feared, and kill with looks,
Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
As if this flesh which walls about our life
Were brass impregnable; and humored thus,
Comes at the last and with a little pin
Bores through his castle wall, and farewell, king!
Cover your heads, and mock not flesh and blood
With solemn reverence. Throw away respect,
Tradition, form, and ceremonious duty,
For you have but mistook me all this while.
Taste grief, need friends. Subjected thus,
How can you say to me I am a king?
My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes,
But presently prevent the ways to wail.
To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,
Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe,
And so your follies fight against yourself.
Fear, and be slain--no worse can come to fight;
And fight and die is death destroying death,
Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.
My father hath a power. Inquire of him,
And learn to make a body of a limb.
Thou chid'st me well.--Proud Bolingbroke, I come
To change blows with thee for our day of doom.--
This ague fit of fear is overblown.
An easy task it is to win our own.--
Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?
Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.
Men judge by the complexion of the sky
So may you by my dull and heavy eye.
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken.
Your uncle York is joined with Bolingbroke,
And all your northern castles yielded up,
And all your southern gentlemen in arms
Upon his party.
Of that sweet way I was in to despair.
What say you now? What comfort have we now?
By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly
That bids me be of comfort anymore.
Go to Flint Castle. There I'll pine away;
That power I have, discharge, and let them go
To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,
For I have none. Let no man speak again
To alter this, for counsel is but vain.
My liege, one word.
That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
Discharge my followers. Let them hence away,
From Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day.
Northumberland, with Soldiers and Attendants.]
So that by this intelligence we learn
The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury
Is gone to meet the King, who lately landed
With some few private friends upon this coast.
The news is very fair and good, my lord:
Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland
To say "King Richard." Alack the heavy day
When such a sacred king should hide his head!
Your Grace mistakes; only to be brief
Left I his title out.
The time hath been, would you have been so brief
He would have been so brief to shorten you,
For taking so the head, your whole head's length.
Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.
Take not, good cousin, further than you should,
Lest you mistake. The heavens are over our heads.
Against their will. But who comes here?
Welcome, Harry. What, will not this castle yield?
The castle royally is manned, my lord,
Against thy entrance.
Royally? Why, it contains no king.
It doth contain a king. King Richard lies
Within the limits of yon lime and stone,
And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman
Of holy reverence--who, I cannot learn.
Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle,
Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley
Into his ruined ears, and thus deliver:
Henry Bolingbroke
On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand
And sends allegiance and true faith of heart
To his most royal person, hither come
Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,
Provided that my banishment repealed
And lands restored again be freely granted.
If not, I'll use the advantage of my power
And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood
Rained from the wounds of slaughtered
Englishmen--
The which how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke
It is such crimson tempest should bedrench
The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land,
My stooping duty tenderly shall show.
Go signify as much while here we march
Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.
Let's march without the noise of threat'ning drum,
That from this castle's tottered battlements
Our fair appointments may be well perused.
Methinks King Richard and myself should meet
With no less terror than the elements
Of fire and water when their thund'ring shock
At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.
Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water;
The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain
My waters--on the earth and not on him.
March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.
See, see, King Richard doth himself appear
As doth the blushing discontented sun
From out the fiery portal of the east
When he perceives the envious clouds are bent
To dim his glory and to stain the track
Of his bright passage to the occident.
Yet looks he like a king. Behold, his eye,
As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth
Controlling majesty. Alack, alack for woe
That any harm should stain so fair a show!
We are amazed, and thus long have we stood
To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
Because we thought ourself thy lawful king.
An if we be, how dare thy joints forget
To pay their awful duty to our presence?
If we be not, show us the hand of God
That hath dismissed us from our stewardship,
For well we know no hand of blood and bone
Can gripe the sacred handle of our scepter,
Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.
And though you think that all, as you have done,
Have torn their souls by turning them from us,
And we are barren and bereft of friends,
Yet know, my master, God omnipotent,
Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf
Armies of pestilence, and they shall strike
Your children yet unborn and unbegot,
That lift your vassal hands against my head
And threat the glory of my precious crown.
Tell Bolingbroke--for yon methinks he stands--
That every stride he makes upon my land
Is dangerous treason. He is come to open
The purple testament of bleeding war;
But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,
Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons
Shall ill become the flower of England's face,
Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace
To scarlet indignation, and bedew
Her pastures' grass with faithful English blood.
The King of heaven forbid our lord the King
Should so with civil and uncivil arms
Be rushed upon! Thy thrice-noble cousin,
Harry Bolingbroke, doth humbly kiss thy hand,
And by the honorable tomb he swears
That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones,
And by the royalties of both your bloods,
Currents that spring from one most gracious head,
And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,
And by the worth and honor of himself,
Comprising all that may be sworn or said,
His coming hither hath no further scope
Than for his lineal royalties, and to beg
Enfranchisement immediate on his knees;
Which on thy royal party granted once,
His glittering arms he will commend to rust,
His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart
To faithful service of your Majesty.
This swears he, as he is a prince and just,
And as I am a gentleman I credit him.
Northumberland, say thus the King returns:
His noble cousin is right welcome hither,
And all the number of his fair demands
Shall be accomplished without contradiction.
With all the gracious utterance thou hast,
Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.
To look so poorly and to speak so fair?
Shall we call back Northumberland and send
Defiance to the traitor and so die?
No, good my lord, let's fight with gentle words,
Till time lend friends, and friends their helpful
That laid the sentence of dread banishment
On yon proud man should take it off again
With words of sooth! O, that I were as great
As is my grief, or lesser than my name!
Or that I could forget what I have been,
Or not remember what I must be now.
Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to
Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.
Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.
What must the King do now? Must he submit?
The King shall do it. Must he be deposed?
The King shall be contented. Must he lose
The name of king? I' God's name, let it go.
My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,
My gay apparel for an almsman's gown,
My figured goblets for a dish of wood,
My scepter for a palmer's walking-staff,
My subjects for a pair of carved saints,
And my large kingdom for a little grave,
Or I'll be buried in the King's highway,
Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet
May hourly trample on their sovereign's head;
For on my heart they tread now whilst I live
And, buried once, why not upon my head?
Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin.
We'll make foul weather with despised tears;
Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn
And make a dearth in this revolting land.
Or shall we play the wantons with our woes
And make some pretty match with shedding tears?
As thus, to drop them still upon one place
Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
Within the earth; and therein laid--there lies
Two kinsmen digged their graves with weeping eyes.
Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see
Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland,
What says King Bolingbroke? Will his Majesty
Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?
You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.
My lord, in the base court he doth attend
To speak with you, may it please you to come down.
Down, down I come, like glist'ring Phaeton,
Wanting the manage of unruly jades.
In the base court--base court, where kings grow
To come at traitors' calls and do them grace.
In the base court come down--down court, down
For nightowls shriek where mounting larks should
Makes him speak fondly like a frantic man,
Yet he is come.
And show fair duty to his Majesty.	
My gracious lord.
Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee
To make the base earth proud with kissing it.
Me rather had my heart might feel your love
Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.
Up, cousin, up. Your heart is up, I know,
Thus high at least  although
My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.
So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,
As my true service shall deserve your love.
Well you deserve. They well deserve to have
That know the strong'st and surest way to get.--
Uncle, give me your hands. Nay, dry your eyes.
Tears show their love but want their remedies.--
Cousin, I am too young to be your father,
Though you are old enough to be my heir.
What you will have I'll give, and willing too,
For do we must what force will have us do.
Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?
Yea, my good lord.
What sport shall we devise here in this garden
To drive away the heavy thought of care?
And that my fortune runs against the bias.
My legs can keep no measure in delight
When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief.
Therefore no dancing, girl. Some other sport.
Of sorrow or of joy?
For if of joy, being altogether wanting,
It doth remember me the more of sorrow;
Or if of grief, being altogether had,
It adds more sorrow to my want of joy.
For what I have I need not to repeat,
And what I want it boots not to complain.
Madam, I'll sing.
But thou shouldst please me better wouldst thou
And I could sing, would weeping do me good,
And never borrow any tear of thee.
But stay, here come the gardeners.
Let's step into the shadow of these trees.
My wretchedness unto a row of pins,
They will talk of state, for everyone doth so
Against a change. Woe is forerun with woe.
Go, bind thou up young dangling apricokes
Which, like unruly children, make their sire
Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight.
Give some supportance to the bending twigs.--
Go thou, and like an executioner
Cut off the heads of too-fast-growing sprays
That look too lofty in our commonwealth.
All must be even in our government.
You thus employed, I will go root away
The noisome weeds which without profit suck
The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.
Why should we, in the compass of a pale,
Keep law and form and due proportion,
Showing as in a model our firm estate,
When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,
Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up,
Her fruit trees all unpruned, her hedges ruined,
Her knots disordered, and her wholesome herbs
Swarming with caterpillars?
He that hath suffered this disordered spring
Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf.
The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did
That seemed in eating him to hold him up,
Are plucked up, root and all, by Bolingbroke--
What, are they dead?
Hath seized the wasteful king. O, what pity is it
That he had not so trimmed and dressed his land
As we this garden! We at time of year
Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit trees,
Lest, being overproud in sap and blood,
With too much riches it confound itself.
Had he done so to great and growing men,
They might have lived to bear and he to taste
Their fruits of duty. Superfluous branches
We lop away, that bearing boughs may live.
Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,
Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.
What, think you the King shall be deposed?
Depressed he is already, and deposed
To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's
That tell black tidings.
Thou old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden,
How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this
What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee
To make a second fall of cursed man?
Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed?
Dar'st thou, thou little better thing than earth,
Divine his downfall? Say where, when, and how
Cam'st thou by this ill tidings? Speak, thou wretch!
Pardon me, madam. Little joy have I
To breathe this news, yet what I say is true.
King Richard, he is in the mighty hold
Of Bolingbroke. Their fortunes both are weighed.
In your lord's scale is nothing but himself
And some few vanities that make him light,
But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,
Besides himself, are all the English peers,
And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.
Post you to London and you will find it so.
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,
Doth not thy embassage belong to me,
And am I last that knows it? O, thou thinkest
To serve me last that I may longest keep
Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go
To meet at London London's king in woe.
What, was I born to this, that my sad look
Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?--
Gard'ner, for telling me these news of woe,
Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow.
Poor queen, so that thy state might be no worse,
Here did she fall a tear. Here in this place
Rue even for ruth here shortly shall be seen
In the remembrance of a weeping queen.
Northumberland, Harry Percy, Fitzwater, Surrey, the
Bishop of Carlisle, the Abbot of Westminster, and
Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind
What thou dost know of noble Gloucester's death,
Who wrought it with the King, and who performed
The bloody office of his timeless end.
Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.
Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.
My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
Scorns to unsay what once it hath delivered.
In that dead time when Gloucester's death was
That reacheth from the restful English court
As far as Calais, to mine uncle's head?"
Amongst much other talk that very time
The offer of an hundred thousand crowns
Than Bolingbroke's return to England,
Adding withal how blest this land would be
In this your cousin's death.
What answer shall I make to this base man?
Shall I so much dishonor my fair stars
On equal terms to give him chastisement?
Either I must or have mine honor soiled
With the attainder of his slanderous lips.
There is my gage, the manual seal of death
That marks thee out for hell. I say thou liest,
And will maintain what thou hast said is false
In thy heart-blood, though being all too base
To stain the temper of my knightly sword.
Bagot, forbear. Thou shalt not take it up.
Excepting one, I would he were the best
In all this presence that hath moved me so.
If that thy valor stand on sympathy,
There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine.
By that fair sun which shows me where thou
That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death.
If thou deniest it twenty times, thou liest,
And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,
Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.
Thou dar'st not, coward, live to see that day.
Now, by my soul, I would it were this hour.
Fitzwater, thou art damned to hell for this.
Aumerle, thou liest! His honor is as true
In this appeal as thou art all unjust;
And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,
To prove it on thee to the extremest point
Of mortal breathing. Seize it if thou dar'st.
An if I do not, may my hands rot off
And never brandish more revengeful steel
Over the glittering helmet of my foe!
And spur thee on with full as many lies
As may be holloed in thy treacherous ear
From sun to sun. There is my honor's pawn.
Engage it to the trial if thou darest.
Who sets me else? By heaven, I'll throw at all!
To answer twenty thousand such as you.
My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well
The very time Aumerle and you did talk.
And you can witness with me this is true.
As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.
Surrey, thou liest.
That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword
That it shall render vengeance and revenge
Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie
In earth as quiet as thy father's skull.
In proof whereof, there is my honor's pawn.
Engage it to the trial if thou dar'st.
How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!
If I dare eat or drink or breathe or live,
And spit upon him whilst I say he lies,
And lies, and lies. There is my bond of faith
To tie thee to my strong correction.	
As I intend to thrive in this new world,
Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal.--
Besides, I heard the banished Norfolk say
That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men
To execute the noble duke at Calais.
Some honest Christian trust me with a gage.
That Norfolk lies, here do I throw down this,
If he may be repealed to try his honor.
These differences shall all rest under gage
Till Norfolk be repealed. Repealed he shall be,
And though mine enemy, restored again
To all his lands and seigniories. When he is
Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.
That honorable day shall never be seen.
Many a time hath banished Norfolk fought
For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,
Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross
Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens;
And, toiled with works of war, retired himself
To Italy, and there at Venice gave
His body to that pleasant country's earth
And his pure soul unto his captain, Christ,
Under whose colors he had fought so long.
Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom
Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants,
Your differences shall all rest under gage
Till we assign you to your days of trial.
Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee
From plume-plucked Richard, who with willing
Adopts thee heir, and his high scepter yields
To the possession of thy royal hand.
Ascend his throne, descending now from him,
And long live Henry, fourth of that name!
In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.
Worst in this royal presence may I speak,
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
Would God that any in this noble presence
Were enough noble to be upright judge
Of noble Richard! Then true noblesse would
Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.
What subject can give sentence on his king?
And who sits here that is not Richard's subject?
Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,
Although apparent guilt be seen in them;
And shall the figure of God's majesty,
His captain, steward, deputy elect,
Anointed, crowned, planted many years,
Be judged by subject and inferior breath,
And he himself not present? O, forfend it God
That in a Christian climate souls refined
Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!
Stirred up by God thus boldly for his king.
My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,
Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king,
And if you crown him, let me prophesy
The blood of English shall manure the ground
And future ages groan for this foul act,
Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,
And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars
Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound.
Disorder, horror, fear, and mutiny
Shall here inhabit, and this land be called
The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls.
It will the woefullest division prove
That ever fell upon this cursed earth!
Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,
Lest child, child's children, cry against you woe!
Well have you argued, sir, and, for your pains,
Of capital treason we arrest you here.--
My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge
To keep him safely till his day of trial.
May it please you, lords, to grant the commons'
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view
He may surrender. So we shall proceed
Without suspicion.
Lords, you that here are under our arrest,
Procure your sureties for your days of answer.
Little are we beholding to your love
And little looked for at your helping hands.
Alack, why am I sent for to a king
Before I have shook off the regal thoughts
Wherewith I reigned? I hardly yet have learned
To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my knee.
Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me
To this submission. Yet I well remember
The favors of these men. Were they not mine?
Did they not sometime cry "All hail" to me?
So Judas did to Christ, but He in twelve
Found truth in all but one; I, in twelve thousand,
God save the King! Will no man say "amen"?
Am I both priest and clerk? Well, then, amen.
God save the King, although I be not he,
And yet amen, if heaven do think him me.
To do what service am I sent for hither?
To do that office of thine own goodwill
Which tired majesty did make thee offer:
The resignation of thy state and crown
To Henry Bolingbroke.
Give me the crown.--Here, cousin, seize the crown.
Here, cousin.
On this side my hand, on that side thine.
Now is this golden crown like a deep well
That owes two buckets, filling one another,
The emptier ever dancing in the air,
The other down, unseen, and full of water.
That bucket down and full of tears am I,
Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.
My crown I am, but still my griefs are mine.
You may my glories and my state depose
But not my griefs; still am I king of those.
Part of your cares you give me with your crown.
Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.
My care is loss of care, by old care done;
Your care is gain of care, by new care won.
The cares I give I have, though given away.
They 'tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.
Are you contented to resign the crown?
Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be.
Therefore no "no," for I resign to thee.
Now, mark me how I will undo myself.
And this unwieldy scepter from my hand,
The pride of kingly sway from out my heart.
With mine own tears I wash away my balm,
With mine own hands I give away my crown,
With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,
With mine own breath release all duteous oaths.
All pomp and majesty I do forswear.
My manors, rents, revenues I forgo;
My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny.
God pardon all oaths that are broke to me.
God keep all vows unbroke are made to thee.
Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,
And thou with all pleased that hast all achieved.
Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit,
And soon lie Richard in an earthy pit.
God save King Henry, unkinged Richard says,
And send him many years of sunshine days.
What more remains?
No more, but that you read
These accusations and these grievous crimes
Committed by your person and your followers
Against the state and profit of this land;
That, by confessing them, the souls of men
May deem that you are worthily deposed.
Must I do so? And must I ravel out
My weaved-up follies? Gentle Northumberland,
If thy offenses were upon record,
Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop
To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst,
There shouldst thou find one heinous article
Containing the deposing of a king
And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,
Marked with a blot, damned in the book of
Nay, all of you that stand and look upon me
Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,
Though some of you, with Pilate, wash your hands,
Showing an outward pity, yet you Pilates
Have here delivered me to my sour cross,
And water cannot wash away your sin.
My lord, dispatch. Read o'er these articles.
Mine eyes are full of tears; I cannot see.
And yet salt water blinds them not so much
But they can see a sort of traitors here.
Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,
For I have given here my soul's consent
Made glory base and sovereignty a slave,
Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.
No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,
Nor no man's lord. I have no name, no title,
No, not that name was given me at the font,
But 'tis usurped. Alack the heavy day,
That I have worn so many winters out
And know not now what name to call myself.
Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke,
To melt myself away in water drops.--
Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,
An if my word be sterling yet in England,
Let it command a mirror hither straight,
That it may show me what a face I have
Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.
Go, some of you, and fetch a looking-glass.
Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.
Fiend, thou torments me ere I come to hell!
Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.
The commons will not then be satisfied.
They shall be satisfied. I'll read enough
When I do see the very book indeed
Where all my sins are writ, and that's myself.
Give me that glass, and therein will I read.
No deeper wrinkles yet? Hath sorrow struck
So many blows upon this face of mine
And made no deeper wounds? O flatt'ring glass,
Like to my followers in prosperity,
Thou dost beguile me. Was this face the face
That every day under his household roof
Did keep ten thousand men? Was this the face
That like the sun did make beholders wink?
Is this the face which faced so many follies,
That was at last outfaced by Bolingbroke?
As brittle as the glory is the face,
For there it is, cracked in an hundred shivers.--
Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport:
How soon my sorrow hath destroyed my face.
The shadow of your sorrow hath destroyed
The shadow of your face.
The shadow of my sorrow? Ha, let's see.
And these external manners of laments
Are merely shadows to the unseen grief
That swells with silence in the tortured soul.
There lies the substance. And I thank thee, king,
For thy great bounty, that not only giv'st
Me cause to wail but teachest me the way
How to lament the cause. I'll beg one boon
And then be gone and trouble you no more.
Shall I obtain it?
For when I was a king, my flatterers
Were then but subjects. Being now a subject,
Being so great, I have no need to beg.
Whither you will, so I were from your sights.
Go, some of you, convey him to the Tower.
That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.
On Wednesday next, we solemnly set down
Our coronation. Lords, prepare yourselves.
Carlisle, Aumerle remain.]
The woe's to come. The children yet unborn
Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
You holy clergymen, is there no plot
To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
Before I freely speak my mind herein,
You shall not only take the sacrament
To bury mine intents, but also to effect
Whatever I shall happen to devise.
Your hearts of sorrow, and your eyes of tears.
Come home with me to supper. I'll lay
This way the King will come. This is the way
To Julius Caesar's ill-erected tower,
To whose flint bosom my condemned lord
Is doomed a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke.
Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth
Have any resting for her true king's queen.
But soft, but see--or rather do not see
My fair rose wither; yet look up, behold,
That you in pity may dissolve to dew
And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.--
Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,
Thou map of honor, thou King Richard's tomb,
And not King Richard! Thou most beauteous inn,
Why should hard-favored grief be lodged in thee
When triumph is become an alehouse guest?
Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so,
To make my end too sudden. Learn, good soul,
To think our former state a happy dream,
From which awaked, the truth of what we are
Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet,
To grim necessity, and he and I
Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France
And cloister thee in some religious house.
Our holy lives must win a new world's crown,
Which our profane hours here have thrown down.
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
Transformed and weakened? Hath Bolingbroke
Deposed thine intellect? Hath he been in thy heart?
The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw
And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage
To be o'er-powered; and wilt thou, pupil-like,
Take the correction, mildly kiss the rod,
And fawn on rage with base humility,
Which art a lion and the king of beasts?
Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for
France.
Think I am dead and that even here thou takest,
As from my deathbed, thy last living leave.
In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire
With good old folks, and let them tell thee tales
Of woeful ages long ago betid;
And, ere thou bid good night, to quite their griefs,
Tell thou the lamentable tale of me,
And send the hearers weeping to their beds.
Forwhy the senseless brands will sympathize
The heavy accent of thy moving tongue,
And in compassion weep the fire out,
And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,
For the deposing of a rightful king.
My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed.
You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.--
And madam, there is order ta'en for you.
With all swift speed you must away to France.
Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,
The time shall not be many hours of age
More than it is ere foul sin, gathering head,
Shall break into corruption. Thou shalt think,
Though he divide the realm and give thee half,
It is too little, helping him to all.
He shall think that thou, which knowest the way
To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,
Being ne'er so little urged another way,
To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.
The love of wicked men converts to fear,
That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both
To worthy danger and deserved death.
My guilt be on my head, and there an end.
Take leave and part, for you must part forthwith.
Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate
And then betwixt me and my married wife.
And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.--
Part us, Northumberland, I towards the north,
Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;
My wife to France, from whence set forth in pomp
She came adorned hither like sweet May,
Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.
And must we be divided? Must we part?
Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.
Banish us both, and send the King with me.
That were some love, but little policy.
Then whither he goes, thither let me go.
So two together weeping make one woe.
Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;
Better far off than, near, be ne'er the near.
Go, count thy way with sighs, I mine with groans.
So longest way shall have the longest moans.
Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,
And piece the way out with a heavy heart.
Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief,
Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief.
One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part.
Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.
Give me mine own again. 'Twere no good part
To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.
So, now I have mine own again, begone,
That I may strive to kill it with a groan.
We make woe wanton with this fond delay.
Once more, adieu! The rest let sorrow say.
My lord, you told me you would tell the rest,
When weeping made you break the story off
Of our two cousins coming into London.
Where did I leave?
Where rude misgoverned hands from windows' tops
Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.
Then, as I said, the Duke, great Bolingbroke,
Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed,
Which his aspiring rider seemed to know,
With slow but stately pace kept on his course,
Whilst all tongues cried "God save thee,
Bolingbroke!"
You would have thought the very windows spake,
So many greedy looks of young and old
Through casements darted their desiring eyes
Upon his visage, and that all the walls
With painted imagery had said at once
Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,
Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck,
Bespake them thus: "I thank you, countrymen."
And thus still doing, thus he passed along.
Alack, poor Richard! Where rode he the whilst?
As in a theater the eyes of men,
After a well-graced actor leaves the stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be tedious,
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
Did scowl on gentle Richard. No man cried "God
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home,
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head,
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
His face still combating with tears and smiles,
The badges of his grief and patience,
That had not God for some strong purpose steeled
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted,
And barbarism itself have pitied him.
But heaven hath a hand in these events,
To whose high will we bound our calm contents.
To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now,
Whose state and honor I for aye allow.
Here comes my son Aumerle.
But that is lost for being Richard's friend,
And, madam, you must call him Rutland now.
And lasting fealty to the new-made king.
Welcome, my son. Who are the violets now
That strew the green lap of the new-come spring?
Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not.
God knows I had as lief be none as one.
Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,
Lest you be cropped before you come to prime.
What news from Oxford? Do these jousts and
What seal is that that hangs without thy bosom?
Yea, lookst thou pale? Let me see the writing.
My lord, 'tis nothing.
It is a matter of small consequence,
Which for some reasons I would not have seen.
Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.
For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.
Bound to himself? What doth he with a bond
That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.--
Boy, let me see the writing.
Treason! Foul treason! Villain, traitor, slave!
Ho, who is within there? Saddle my horse!--
God for his mercy, what treachery is here!
Give me my boots, I say! Saddle my horse!--
Now by mine honor, by my life, by my troth,
Good mother, be content. It is no more
Than my poor life must answer.
Bring me my boots!--I will unto the King.
Strike him, Aumerle! Poor boy, thou art amazed.--
Hence, villain, never more come in my sight.
Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
Have we more sons? Or are we like to have?
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age
And rob me of a happy mother's name?
Is he not like thee? Is he not thine own?
Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
And interchangeably set down their hands
To kill the King at Oxford.
He shall be none. We'll keep him here.
Then what is that to him?
Away, fond woman! Were he twenty times my son,
Hadst thou groaned for him as I have done,
Thou wouldst be more pitiful.
But now I know thy mind: thou dost suspect
That I have been disloyal to thy bed
And that he is a bastard, not thy son.
Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind!
He is as like thee as a man may be,
Not like to me or any of my kin,
And yet I love him.
After, Aumerle! Mount thee upon his horse,
Spur post, and get before him to the King,
And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.
And never will I rise up from the ground
Till Bolingbroke have pardoned thee. Away, begone!
Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son?
If any plague hang over us, 'tis he.
Inquire at London, 'mongst the taverns there,
For there, they say, he daily doth frequent
With unrestrained loose companions,
Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes
And beat our watch and rob our passengers,
While he, young wanton and effeminate boy,
Takes on the point of honor to support
So dissolute a crew.
My lord, some two days since I saw the Prince,
And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.
His answer was, he would unto the stews,
And from the common'st creature pluck a glove
And wear it as a favor, and with that
He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.
As dissolute as desperate. Yet through both
May happily bring forth. But who comes here?
What means our cousin, that he stares and looks so
God save your Grace. I do beseech your Majesty
To have some conference with your Grace alone.
Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.
What is the matter with our cousin now?
Forever may my knees grow to the earth,
My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth,
Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.
Intended or committed was this fault?
If on the first, how heinous e'er it be,
To win thy after-love I pardon thee.
Then give me leave that I may turn the key
That no man enter till my tale be done.
My liege, beware! Look to thyself!
Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there.
Stay thy revengeful hand. Thou hast no cause to fear.
Open the door, secure, foolhardy king!
Shall I for love speak treason to thy face?
Open the door, or I will break it open.
Recover breath. Tell us how near is danger
That we may arm us to encounter it.
Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know
The treason that my haste forbids me show.
Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise passed.
My heart is not confederate with my hand.
It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.--
Fear, and not love, begets his penitence.
Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove
Thou sheer, immaculate, and silver fountain
From whence this stream, through muddy passages,
Hath held his current and defiled himself,
Thy overflow of good converts to bad,
And thy abundant goodness shall excuse
This deadly blot in thy digressing son.
So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd,
And he shall spend mine honor with his shame,
As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.
Mine honor lives when his dishonor dies,
Or my shamed life in his dishonor lies.
Thou kill'st me in his life: giving him breath,
The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.
What ho, my liege! For God's sake, let me in!
What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?
Speak with me, pity me. Open the door!
Our scene is altered from a serious thing
And now changed to "The Beggar and the King."--
My dangerous cousin, let your mother in.
If thou do pardon whosoever pray,
More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.
This festered joint cut off, the rest rest sound.
This let alone will all the rest confound.
Love loving not itself, none other can.
Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?
Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?
Sweet York, be patient.--Hear me, gentle liege.
Rise up, good aunt.
Forever will I walk upon my knees
And never see day that the happy sees,
Till thou give joy, until thou bid me joy
By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.
Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.
Against them both my true joints bended be.
Ill mayst thou thrive if thou grant any grace.
Pleads he in earnest? Look upon his face.
His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest;
His words come from his mouth, ours from our
He prays but faintly and would be denied.
We pray with heart and soul and all beside.
His weary joints would gladly rise, I know.
Our knees still kneel till to the ground they grow.
His prayers are full of false hypocrisy,
Ours of true zeal and deep integrity.
Our prayers do outpray his. Then let them have
That mercy which true prayer ought to have.
Good aunt, stand up.
Say "pardon" first and afterwards "stand up."
An if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach,
Say "pardon," king; let pity teach thee how.
The word is short, but not so short as sweet.
No word like "pardon" for kings' mouths so meet.
Speak it in French, king. Say "pardonne moy."
Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?
Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord,
That sets the word itself against the word!
The chopping French we do not understand.
Thine eye begins to speak; set thy tongue there,
Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear,
That, hearing how our plaints and prayers do
Pity may move thee "pardon" to rehearse.
Good aunt, stand up.
Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.
Yet am I sick for fear. Speak it again.
Twice saying "pardon" doth not pardon twain,
But makes one pardon strong.
But for our trusty brother-in-law and the Abbot,
With all the rest of that consorted crew,
Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.
Good uncle, help to order several powers
To Oxford or where'er these traitors are.
They shall not live within this world, I swear,
But I will have them, if I once know where.
Uncle, farewell,--and cousin, adieu.
Your mother well hath prayed; and prove you true.
Come, my old son. I pray God make thee new.
Didst thou not mark the King, what words he spake,
Was it not so?
And urged it twice together, did he not?
And speaking it, he wishtly looked on me,
As who should say "I would thou wert the man
That would divorce this terror from my heart"--
Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let's go.
This prison where I live unto the world,
And for because the world is populous
And here is not a creature but myself,
My brain I'll prove the female to my soul,
My soul the father, and these two beget
And these same thoughts people this little world,
In humors like the people of this world,
For no thought is contented. The better sort,
As thoughts of things divine, are intermixed
With scruples, and do set the word itself
Against the word, as thus: "Come, little ones,"
And then again,
To thread the postern of a small needle's eye."
Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot
Unlikely wonders: how these vain weak nails
May tear a passage through the flinty ribs
Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls,
And, for they cannot, die in their own pride.
Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves
That they are not the first of fortune's slaves,
Nor shall not be the last--like silly beggars
Who, sitting in the stocks, refuge their shame
That many have and others must sit there,
And in this thought they find a kind of ease,
Bearing their own misfortunes on the back
Of such as have before endured the like.
Thus play I in one person many people,
And none contented. Sometimes am I king.
Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar,
And so I am; then crushing penury
Persuades me I was better when a king.
Then am I kinged again, and by and by
Think that I am unkinged by Bolingbroke,
And straight am nothing. But whate'er I be,
Nor I nor any man that but man is
With nothing shall be pleased till he be eased
With being nothing.  Music do I
Ha, ha, keep time! How sour sweet music is
When time is broke and no proportion kept.
So is it in the music of men's lives.
And here have I the daintiness of ear
To check time broke in a disordered string;
But for the concord of my state and time
Had not an ear to hear my true time broke.
For now hath time made me his numb'ring clock.
My thoughts are minutes, and with sighs they jar
Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch,
Whereto my finger, like a dial's point,
Is pointing still in cleansing them from tears.
Now, sir, the sound that tells what hour it is
Are clamorous groans which strike upon my heart,
Which is the bell. So sighs and tears and groans
Show minutes, times, and hours. But my time
Runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy,
While I stand fooling here, his jack of the clock.
This music mads me. Let it sound no more,
For though it have holp madmen to their wits,
In me it seems it will make wise men mad.
Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me,
For 'tis a sign of love, and love to Richard
Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.
The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.
What art thou, and how comest thou hither,
Where no man never comes but that sad dog
That brings me food to make misfortune live?
When thou wert king; who, traveling towards York,
With much ado at length have gotten leave
To look upon my sometime royal master's face.
In London streets, that coronation day,
When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary,
That horse that thou so often hast bestrid,
That horse that I so carefully have dressed.
Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,
How went he under him?
So proudly as if he disdained the ground.
So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back!
That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand;
This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.
Would he not stumble? Would he not fall down
Of that proud man that did usurp his back?
Forgiveness, horse! Why do I rail on thee,
Since thou, created to be awed by man,
Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse,
And yet I bear a burden like an ass,
Spurred, galled, and tired by jauncing Bolingbroke.
Fellow, give place. Here is no longer stay.
If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.
What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.
Taste of it first as thou art wont to do.
My lord, I dare not. Sir Pierce of Exton,
Who lately came from the King, commands the
The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!
Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.
How now, what means death in this rude assault?
Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
Go thou and fill another room in hell.
That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire
That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand
Hath with the King's blood stained the King's own
Mount, mount, my soul. Thy seat is up on high,
Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.
As full of valor as of royal blood.
Both have I spilled. O, would the deed were good!
For now the devil that told me I did well
Says that this deed is chronicled in hell.
This dead king to the living king I'll bear.
Take hence the rest and give them burial here.
Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear
Is that the rebels have consumed with fire
Our town of Ciceter in Gloucestershire,
But whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.
Welcome, my lord. What is the news?
First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.
The next news is: I have to London sent
The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent.
The manner of their taking may appear
At large discoursed in this paper here.
We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains,
And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.
My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London
The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely,
Two of the dangerous consorted traitors
That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.
Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot.
Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.
The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,
With clog of conscience and sour melancholy
Hath yielded up his body to the grave.
But here is Carlisle living, to abide
Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.
Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,
More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life.
So, as thou liv'st in peace, die free from strife;
For, though mine enemy thou hast ever been,
High sparks of honor in thee have I seen.
Great king, within this coffin I present
Thy buried fear. Herein all breathless lies
The mightiest of thy greatest enemies,
Richard of Bourdeaux, by me hither brought.
Exton, I thank thee not, for thou hast wrought
Upon my head and all this famous land.
From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.
They love not poison that do poison need,
Nor do I thee. Though I did wish him dead,
The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labor,
But neither my good word nor princely favor.
With Cain go wander through shades of night,
And never show thy head by day nor light.
Lords, I protest my soul is full of woe
That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow.
Come mourn with me for what I do lament,
And put on sullen black incontinent.
To wash this blood off from my guilty hand.
March sadly after. Grace my mournings here
In weeping after this untimely bier.
You do not meet a man but frowns. Our bloods
No more obey the heavens than our courtiers'
Still seem as does the King's.
His daughter, and the heir of 's kingdom, whom
He purposed to his wife's sole son--a widow
That late he married--hath referred herself
Unto a poor but worthy gentleman. She's wedded,
Her husband banished, she imprisoned. All
Is outward sorrow, though I think the King
Be touched at very heart.
He that hath lost her, too. So is the Queen,
That most desired the match. But not a courtier,
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the King's looks, hath a heart that is not
Glad at the thing they scowl at.
He that hath missed the Princess is a thing
Too bad for bad report, and he that hath her--
And therefore banished--is a creature such
As, to seek through the regions of the Earth
For one his like, there would be something failing
In him that should compare. I do not think
So fair an outward and such stuff within
Endows a man but he.
Crush him together rather than unfold
His measure duly.
Was called Sicilius, who did join his honor
Against the Romans with Cassibelan,
But had his titles by Tenantius, whom
He served with glory and admired success,
So gained the sur-addition Leonatus;
And had, besides this gentleman in question,
Two other sons, who in the wars o' th' time
Died with their swords in hand. For which their
Then old and fond of issue, took such sorrow
That he quit being; and his gentle lady,
Big of this gentleman our theme, deceased
As he was born. The King he takes the babe
To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
Breeds him and makes him of his bedchamber,
Puts to him all the learnings that his time
Could make him the receiver of, which he took
As we do air, fast as 'twas ministered,
And in 's spring became a harvest; lived in court--
Which rare it is to do--most praised, most loved,
For whom he now is banished, her own price
Proclaims how she esteemed him; and his virtue
By her election may be truly read
What kind of man he is.
Even out of your report. But pray you tell me,
Is she sole child to th' King?
He had two sons--if this be worth your hearing,
Mark it--the eldest of them at three years old,
Were stol'n, and to this hour no guess in knowledge
Which way they went.
That a king's children should be so conveyed,
So slackly guarded, and the search so slow
That could not trace them!
Or that the negligence may well be laughed at,
Yet is it true, sir.
We must forbear. Here comes the gentleman,
The Queen and Princess.
No, be assured you shall not find me, daughter,
After the slander of most stepmothers,
Evil-eyed unto you. You're my prisoner, but
Your jailer shall deliver you the keys
That lock up your restraint.--For you, Posthumus,
So soon as I can win th' offended king,
The fire of rage is in him, and 'twere good
You leaned unto his sentence with what patience
Your wisdom may inform you.
The pangs of barred affections, though the King
Hath charged you should not speak together.	
Dissembling courtesy! How fine this tyrant
Can tickle where she wounds! My dearest husband,
Always reserved my holy duty--what
His rage can do on me. You must be gone,
And I shall here abide the hourly shot
Of angry eyes, not comforted to live
But that there is this jewel in the world
That I may see again.	
To be suspected of more tenderness
Than doth become a man. I will remain
The loyal'st husband that did e'er plight troth.
My residence in Rome at one Philario's,
Who to my father was a friend, to me
Known but by letter; thither write, my queen,
And with mine eyes I'll drink the words you send,
Though ink be made of gall.
If the King come, I shall incur I know not
How much of his displeasure.  Yet I'll move
To walk this way. I never do him wrong
But he does buy my injuries, to be friends,
Pays dear for my offenses.	
As long a term as yet we have to live,
The loathness to depart would grow. Adieu.
Were you but riding forth to air yourself,
Such parting were too petty. Look here, love:
This diamond was my mother's. 
But keep it till you woo another wife
When Imogen is dead.
You gentle gods, give me but this I have,
And cere up my embracements from a next
With bonds of death.	
Remain, remain thou here,
While sense can keep it on.--And sweetest, fairest,
As I my poor self did exchange for you
To your so infinite loss, so in our trifles
It is a manacle of love. I'll place it
Upon this fairest prisoner.	
When shall we see again?
Thou basest thing, avoid hence, from my sight!
If after this command thou fraught the court
With thy unworthiness, thou diest. Away!
Thou 'rt poison to my blood.
And bless the good remainders of the court.
More sharp than this is.
That shouldst repair my youth, thou heap'st
Harm not yourself with your vexation.
Subdues all pangs, all fears.
Past hope and in despair; that way past grace.
That mightst have had the sole son of my queen!
And did avoid a puttock.
Thou took'st a beggar, wouldst have made my throne
It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus.
You bred him as my playfellow, and he is
Almost the sum he pays.
Almost, sir. Heaven restore me! Would I were
Our neighbor shepherd's son.	
They were again together. You have done
Not after our command. Away with her
And pen her up.
Dear lady daughter, peace.--Sweet sovereign,
Leave us to ourselves, and make yourself some
Out of your best advice.
Die of this folly.	
Here is your servant.--How now, sir? What news?
My lord your son drew on my master.
No harm, I trust, is done?
But that my master rather played than fought
And had no help of anger. They were parted
By gentlemen at hand.
Your son's my father's friend; he takes his part
To draw upon an exile. O, brave sir!
Myself by with a needle, that I might prick
The goer-back.--Why came you from your master?
On his command. He would not suffer me
To bring him to the haven, left these notes
Of what commands I should be subject to
When 't pleased you to employ me.
Your faithful servant. I dare lay mine honor
He will remain so.
Pray, walk awhile.
Pray you, speak with me. You shall at least
Go see my lord aboard. For this time leave me.
Where air comes out, air comes in. There's
And questionedst every sail. If he should write
And I not have it, 'twere a paper lost
As offered mercy is. What was the last
That he spake to thee?
Then waved his handkerchief?
Senseless linen, happier therein than I.
And that was all?
As he could make me with this eye or ear
Distinguish him from others, he did keep
The deck, with glove or hat or handkerchief
Still waving, as the fits and stirs of 's mind
Could best express how slow his soul sailed on,
How swift his ship.
As little as a crow, or less, ere left
To after-eye him.
To look upon him till the diminution
Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle;
Nay, followed him till he had melted from
The smallness of a gnat to air; and then
Have turned mine eye and wept. But, good Pisanio,
When shall we hear from him?
With his next vantage.
Most pretty things to say. Ere I could tell him
How I would think on him at certain hours
Such thoughts and such; or I could make him swear
The shes of Italy should not betray
Mine interest and his honor; or have charged him
At the sixth hour of morn, at noon, at midnight
Give him that parting kiss which I had set
Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father,
And like the tyrannous breathing of the north
Shakes all our buds from growing.
Desires your Highness' company.
Those things I bid you do, get them dispatched.
But I could then have looked on him without the
Here comes the Briton. Let him be so entertained
It was much like an argument that fell out
Italy.
Your ring may be stolen too. So your brace of unprizable
My ring I hold dear as my finger; 'tis part of it.
We will have these things set down by lawful counsel,
Whiles yet the dew's on ground, gather those flowers.
Make haste. Who has the note of them?
Now, Master Doctor, have you brought those drugs?
Pleaseth your Highness, ay. Here they are, madam.
But I beseech your Grace, without offense--
My conscience bids me ask--wherefore you have
Commanded of me these most poisonous
Which are the movers of a languishing death,
But though slow, deadly.
Thou ask'st me such a question. Have I not been
Thy pupil long? Hast thou not learned me how
To make perfumes, distil, preserve--yea, so
That our great king himself doth woo me oft
For my confections? Having thus far proceeded,
Unless thou think'st me devilish, is 't not meet
That I did amplify my judgment in
Other conclusions? I will try the forces
Of these thy compounds on such creatures as
We count not worth the hanging--but none human--
To try the vigor of them and apply
Allayments to their act, and by them gather
Their several virtues and effects.
Shall from this practice but make hard your heart.
Besides, the seeing these effects will be
Both noisome and infectious.
Will I first work. He's for his master
And enemy to my son.--How now, Pisanio?--
Doctor, your service for this time is ended.
Take your own way.
But you shall do no harm.
Strange ling'ring poisons. I do know her spirit,
And will not trust one of her malice with
Will stupefy and dull the sense awhile,
Which first perchance she'll prove on cats and dogs,
Then afterward up higher. But there is
No danger in what show of death it makes,
More than the locking-up the spirits a time,
To be more fresh, reviving. She is fooled
With a most false effect, and I the truer
So to be false with her.
Until I send for thee.
Weeps she still, sayst thou? Dost thou think in time
She will not quench and let instructions enter
Where folly now possesses? Do thou work.
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my son,
As great as is thy master; greater, for
His fortunes all lie speechless, and his name
Is at last gasp. Return he cannot, nor
Continue where he is. To shift his being
Is to exchange one misery with another,
And every day that comes comes to decay
To be depender on a thing that leans,
Who cannot be new built, nor has no friends
So much as but to prop him? 
Thou know'st not what. But take it for thy labor.
It is a thing I made which hath the King
Five times redeemed from death. I do not know
What is more cordial. Nay, I prithee, take it.
It is an earnest of a farther good
That I mean to thee. Tell thy mistress how
The case stands with her. Do 't as from thyself.
Think what a chance thou changest on, but think
Thou hast thy mistress still; to boot, my son,
Who shall take notice of thee. I'll move the King
To any shape of thy preferment such
As thou 'lt desire; and then myself, I chiefly,
That set thee on to this desert, am bound
To load thy merit richly. Call my women.
Think on my words.	
Not to be shaked; the agent for his master
And the remembrancer of her to hold
The handfast to her lord. I have given him that
Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her
Of liegers for her sweet, and which she after,
Except she bend her humor, shall be assured
To taste of too.
The violets, cowslips, and the primroses
Bear to my closet.--Fare thee well, Pisanio.
Think on my words.	
But when to my good lord I prove untrue,
That hath her husband banished. O, that husband,
My supreme crown of grief and those repeated
Vexations of it! Had I been thief-stol'n,
As my two brothers, happy; but most miserable
Is the desire that's glorious. Blessed be those,
How mean soe'er, that have their honest wills,
Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie!
Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome
Comes from my lord with letters.
The worthy Leonatus is in safety
And greets your Highness dearly.
You're kindly welcome.
All of her that is out of door, most rich!
If she be furnished with a mind so rare,
She is alone th' Arabian bird, and I
Have lost the wager. Boldness be my friend.
Arm me, audacity, from head to foot,
Or like the Parthian I shall flying fight--
Rather, directly fly.
Leonatus.
So far I read aloud.
But even the very middle of my heart
Is warmed by th' rest and takes it thankfully.--
You are as welcome, worthy sir, as I
Have words to bid you, and shall find it so
In all that I can do.
What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes
To see this vaulted arch and the rich crop
Of sea and land, which can distinguish 'twixt
The fiery orbs above and the twinned stones
Upon the numbered beach, and can we not
Partition make with spectacles so precious
It cannot be i' th' eye, for apes and monkeys
Contemn with mows the other; nor i' th' judgment,
For idiots in this case of favor would
Be wisely definite; nor i' th' appetite--
Sluttery to such neat excellence opposed
Should make desire vomit emptiness,
Not so allured to feed.
What is the matter, trow?
That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that tub
Both filled and running, ravening first the lamb,
Longs after for the garbage.
Thus raps you? Are you well?
Desire my man's abode where I did leave him.
He's strange and peevish.
To give him welcome.	
Continues well my lord? His health, beseech you?
Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is.
Exceeding pleasant. None a stranger there
So merry and so gamesome. He is called
The Briton Reveler.
He did incline to sadness, and ofttimes
Not knowing why.
There is a Frenchman his companion, one
An eminent monsieur that, it seems, much loves
The thick sighs from him, whiles the jolly Briton--
Your lord, I mean--laughs from 's free lungs, cries "O,
Can my sides hold to think that man who knows
By history, report, or his own proof
What woman is, yea, what she cannot choose
But must be, will 's free hours languish for
Assured bondage?"
Ay, madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter.
It is a recreation to be by
And hear him mock the Frenchman. But heavens
Some men are much to blame.
Not he--but yet heaven's bounty towards him might
Be used more thankfully. In himself 'tis much;
In you, which I account his, beyond all talents.
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound
To pity too.
Two creatures heartily.
You look on me. What wrack discern you in me
Deserves your pity?
To hide me from the radiant sun and solace
Deliver with more openness your answers
To my demands. Why do you pity me?
It is an office of the gods to venge it,
Not mine to speak on 't.
Something of me or what concerns me. Pray you,
Since doubting things go ill often hurts more
Than to be sure they do--for certainties
Either are past remedies, or, timely knowing,
The remedy then born--discover to me
What both you spur and stop.
To bathe my lips upon; this hand, whose touch,
Whose every touch, would force the feeler's soul
To th' oath of loyalty; this object which
Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye,
Fixing it only here; should I, damned then,
Slaver with lips as common as the stairs
That mount the Capitol, join gripes with hands
Made hard with hourly falsehood--falsehood as
With labor; then by-peeping in an eye
Base and illustrous as the smoky light
That's fed with stinking tallow; it were fit
That all the plagues of hell should at one time
Encounter such revolt.
Has forgot Britain.
Inclined to this intelligence, pronounce
The beggary of his change, but 'tis your graces
That from my mutest conscience to my tongue
Charms this report out.
With pity that doth make me sick. A lady
So fair, and fastened to an empery
Would make the great'st king double, to be partnered
With tomboys hired with that self exhibition
Which your own coffers yield, with diseased ventures
That play with all infirmities for gold
Which rottenness can lend nature; such boiled stuff
As well might poison poison. Be revenged,
Or she that bore you was no queen, and you
Recoil from your great stock.
How should I be revenged? If this be true--
As I have such a heart that both mine ears
Must not in haste abuse--if it be true,
How should I be revenged?
Live like Diana's priest betwixt cold sheets,
Whiles he is vaulting variable ramps,
In your despite, upon your purse? Revenge it.
More noble than that runagate to your bed,
And will continue fast to your affection,
Still close as sure.
Let me my service tender on your lips.
Away! I do condemn mine ears that have
So long attended thee. If thou wert honorable,
Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue, not
For such an end thou seek'st, as base as strange.
Thou wrong'st a gentleman who is as far
From thy report as thou from honor, and
Solicits here a lady that disdains
Thee and the devil alike.--What ho, Pisanio!--
The King my father shall be made acquainted
Of thy assault. If he shall think it fit
As in a Romish stew and to expound
His beastly mind to us, he hath a court
He little cares for and a daughter who
He not respects at all.--What ho, Pisanio!
The credit that thy lady hath of thee
Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness
Her assured credit.--Blessed live you long,
Country called his; and you his mistress, only
For the most worthiest fit. Give me your pardon.
Were deeply rooted, and shall make your lord
That which he is, new o'er; and he is one
The truest mannered, such a holy witch
That he enchants societies into him.
Half all men's hearts are his.
He sits 'mongst men like a descended god.
He hath a kind of honor sets him off
More than a mortal seeming. Be not angry,
Most mighty princess, that I have adventured
To try your taking of a false report, which hath
Honored with confirmation your great judgment
In the election of a sir so rare,
Which you know cannot err. The love I bear him
Made me to fan you thus, but the gods made you,
Unlike all others, chaffless. Pray, your pardon.
All's well, sir. Take my power i' th' court for yours.
My humble thanks. I had almost forgot
And yet of moment too, for it concerns.
Your lord, myself, and other noble friends
Are partners in the business.
Some dozen Romans of us and your lord--
The best feather of our wing--have mingled sums
To buy a present for the Emperor;
Which I, the factor for the rest, have done
In France. 'Tis plate of rare device and jewels
Of rich and exquisite form, their values great.
And I am something curious, being strange,
To have them in safe stowage. May it please you
To take them in protection?
And pawn mine honor for their safety. Since
My lord hath interest in them, I will keep them
In my bedchamber.
Attended by my men. I will make bold
To send them to you, only for this night.
Yes, I beseech, or I shall short my word
By length'ning my return. From Gallia
To see your Grace.
But not away tomorrow.
Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
To greet your lord with writing, do 't tonight.
To th' tender of our present.
Send your trunk to me; it shall safe be kept
And truly yielded you. You're very welcome.
They dare not fight with me because of the Queen
That such a crafty devil as is his mother
Should yield the world this ass! A woman that
Bears all down with her brain, and this her son
Cannot take two from twenty, for his heart,
And leave eighteen. Alas, poor princess,
Thou divine Imogen, what thou endur'st,
Betwixt a father by thy stepdame governed,
More hateful than the foul expulsion is
Of thy dear husband, than that horrid act
Of the divorce he'd make! The heavens hold firm
The walls of thy dear honor, keep unshaked
That temple, thy fair mind, that thou mayst stand
Who's there? My woman Helen?
What hour is it?
Fold down the leaf where I have left. To bed.
Take not away the taper; leave it burning.
And if thou canst awake by four o' th' clock,
To your protection I commend me, gods.
From fairies and the tempters of the night
Guard me, beseech you.	
The crickets sing, and man's o'erlabored sense
Repairs itself by rest. Our Tarquin thus
Did softly press the rushes ere he wakened
The chastity he wounded.--Cytherea,
How bravely thou becom'st thy bed, fresh lily,
And whiter than the sheets.--That I might touch!
But kiss, one kiss! Rubies unparagoned,
How dearly they do 't. 'Tis her breathing that
Perfumes the chamber thus. The flame o' th' taper
Bows toward her and would underpeep her lids
To see th' enclosed lights, now canopied
Under these windows, white and azure-laced
With blue of heaven's own tinct. But my design:
To note the chamber. I will write all down.
Such and such pictures; there the window; such
Th' adornment of her bed; the arras, figures,
Why, such and such; and the contents o' th' story.
Ah, but some natural notes about her body
Above ten thousand meaner movables
Would testify t' enrich mine inventory.
And be her sense but as a monument
Thus in a chapel lying. 
As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard.
As strongly as the conscience does within
To th' madding of her lord. On her left breast
Stronger than ever law could make. This secret
Will force him think I have picked the lock and ta'en
The treasure of her honor. No more. To what end?
Why should I write this down that's riveted,
Screwed to my memory? She hath been reading late
The tale of Tereus; here the leaf's turned down
Where Philomel gave up. I have enough.
To th' trunk again, and shut the spring of it.
Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning
May bare the raven's eye. I lodge in fear.
Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.
One, two, three. Time, time!
Come on, tune. If you can penetrate her with your
Song.
Attend you here the door of our stern daughter?
Will she not forth?
The exile of her minion is too new;
She hath not yet forgot him. Some more time
Must wear the print of his remembrance on 't,
And then she's yours.
Who lets go by no vantages that may
Prefer you to his daughter. Frame yourself
To orderly solicits and be friended
With aptness of the season. Make denials
Increase your services. So seem as if
You were inspired to do those duties which
You tender to her; that you in all obey her,
Save when command to your dismission tends,
And therein you are senseless.
So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome;
The one is Caius Lucius.	
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now.
But that's no fault of his. We must receive him
According to the honor of his sender,
And towards himself, his goodness forespent on us,
We must extend our notice.--Our dear son,
When you have given good morning to your mistress,
Attend the Queen and us. We shall have need
Lords and Attendants.]
If she be up, I'll speak with her; if not,
Let her lie still and dream.  By your
If I do line one of their hands? 'Tis gold
Which buys admittance--oft it doth--yea, and makes
Diana's rangers false themselves, yield up
Their deer to th' stand o' th' stealer; and 'tis gold
Which makes the true man killed and saves the thief,
Nay, sometime hangs both thief and true man. What
Can it not do and undo? I will make
One of her women lawyer to me, for
By your leave.	
Who's there that knocks?
Yes, and a gentlewoman's son.
Than some whose tailors are as dear as yours
Can justly boast of. What's your Lordship's pleasure?
Your lady's person. Is she ready?
To keep her chamber.
Sell me your good report.	
How, my good name? Or to report of you
What I shall think is good?
The Princess.
Good morrow, fairest sister. Your sweet hand.
Good morrow, sir. You lay out too much pains
For purchasing but trouble. The thanks I give
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks
And scarce can spare them.
If you but said so, 'twere as deep with me.
If you swear still, your recompense is still
That I regard it not.
But that you shall not say I yield being silent,
To your best kindness. One of your great knowing
Should learn, being taught, forbearance.
To leave you in your madness 'twere my sin.
Fools are not mad folks.
If you'll be patient, I'll no more be mad.
That cures us both. I am much sorry, sir,
You put me to forget a lady's manners
By being so verbal; and learn now for all
That I, which know my heart, do here pronounce,
By th' very truth of it, I care not for you,
And am so near the lack of charity
To accuse myself I hate you--which I had rather
You felt than make 't my boast.
Obedience, which you owe your father. For
The contract you pretend with that base wretch--
One bred of alms and fostered with cold dishes,
With scraps o' th' court--it is no contract, none;
And though it be allowed in meaner parties--
Yet who than he more mean?--to knit their souls,
On whom there is no more dependency
But brats and beggary, in self-figured knot;
Yet you are curbed from that enlargement by
The consequence o' th' crown, and must not foil
The precious note of it with a base slave,
Wert thou the son of Jupiter and no more
But what thou art besides, thou wert too base
To be his groom. Thou wert dignified enough,
Even to the point of envy, if 'twere made
Comparative for your virtues to be styled
The under-hangman of his kingdom and hated
For being preferred so well.
He never can meet more mischance than come
To be but named of thee. His mean'st garment
That ever hath but clipped his body is dearer
In my respect than all the hairs above thee,
Were they all made such men.--How now, Pisanio!
To Dorothy, my woman, hie thee presently.
Frighted and angered worse. Go bid my woman
Search for a jewel that too casually
Hath left mine arm. It was thy master's. Shrew me
If I would lose it for a revenue
Of any king's in Europe. I do think
Last night 'twas on mine arm; I kissed it.
That I kiss aught but he.
If you will make 't an action, call witness to 't.
She's my good lady and will conceive, I hope,
But the worst of me. So I leave you, sir,
To th' worst of discontent.	
Fear it not, sir. I would I were so sure
To win the King as I am bold her honor
Will remain hers.
Not any, but abide the change of time,
Quake in the present winter's state, and wish
That warmer days would come. In these feared
Your very goodness and your company
Hath heard of great Augustus. Caius Lucius
Will do 's commission throughly. And I think
He'll grant the tribute, send th' arrearages,
Or look upon our Romans, whose remembrance
Is yet fresh in their grief.
Statist though I am none nor like to be,
That this will prove a war; and you shall hear
The legion now in Gallia sooner landed
In our not-fearing Britain than have tidings
Of any penny tribute paid. Our countrymen
Are men more ordered than when Julius Caesar
Smiled at their lack of skill but found their courage
Worthy his frowning at. Their discipline,
Now winged with their courages, will make known
To their approvers they are people such
That mend upon the world.
The swiftest harts have posted you by land,
And winds of all the corners kissed your sails
To make your vessel nimble.
The speediness of your return.
Is one of the fairest that I have looked upon.
And therewithal the best, or let her beauty
Look thorough a casement to allure false hearts
And be false with them.
Their tenor good, I trust.
Was Caius Lucius in the Briton court
When you were there?
He was expected then, but not approached.
Sparkles this stone as it was wont, or is 't not
Too dull for your good wearing?
Was mine in Britain, for the ring is won.
The stone's too hard to come by.
Your lady being so easy.
Your loss your sport. I hope you know that we
Must not continue friends.
If you keep covenant. Had I not brought
The knowledge of your mistress home, I grant
We were to question farther; but I now
Profess myself the winner of her honor,
Together with your ring, and not the wronger
Of her or you, having proceeded but
By both your wills.
That you have tasted her in bed, my hand
And ring is yours. If not, the foul opinion
You had of her pure honor gains or loses
Your sword or mine, or masterless leave both
To who shall find them.
Being so near the truth as I will make them,
Must first induce you to believe; whose strength
You'll give me leave to spare when you shall find
You need it not.
Where I confess I slept not, but profess
Had that was well worth watching--it was hanged
With tapestry of silk and silver, the story
Proud Cleopatra when she met her Roman
And Cydnus swelled above the banks, or for
The press of boats or pride. A piece of work
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive
In workmanship and value, which I wondered
Could be so rarely and exactly wrought
Since the true life on 't was--
And this you might have heard of here, by me
Or by some other.
Must justify my knowledge.
Or do your honor injury.
Is south the chamber, and the chimney-piece
Chaste Dian bathing. Never saw I figures
So likely to report themselves; the cutter
Was as another Nature, dumb, outwent her,
Motion and breath left out.
Which you might from relation likewise reap,
Being, as it is, much spoke of.
With golden cherubins is fretted. Her andirons--
Of silver, each on one foot standing, nicely
Depending on their brands.
Let it be granted you have seen all this--and praise
Be given to your remembrance--the description
Of what is in her chamber nothing saves
The wager you have laid.
Be pale, I beg but leave to air this jewel. See--
And now 'tis up again. It must be married
To that your diamond. I'll keep them.
Once more let me behold it. Is it that
Which I left with her?
She stripped it from her arm. I see her yet.
Her pretty action did outsell her gift
And yet enriched it too. She gave it me
And said she prized it once.
To send it me.
It is a basilisk unto mine eye,
Kills me to look on 't. Let there be no honor
Where there is beauty, truth where semblance, love
Where there's another man. The vows of women
Of no more bondage be to where they are made
Than they are to their virtues, which is nothing.
And take your ring again. 'Tis not yet won.
It may be probable she lost it; or
Who knows if one her women, being corrupted,
Hath stol'n it from her.
And so I hope he came by 't.--Back, my ring!
Render to me some corporal sign about her
More evident than this, for this was stol'n.
By Jupiter, I had it from her arm.
Hark you, he swears! By Jupiter he swears.
She would not lose it. Her attendants are
All sworn and honorable. They induced to steal it?
And by a stranger? No, he hath enjoyed her.
The cognizance of her incontinency
Is this. She hath bought the name of whore thus
There, take thy hire, and all the fiends of hell
Divide themselves between you!
This is not strong enough to be believed
Of one persuaded well of.
She hath been colted by him.
For further satisfying, under her breast,
Worthy the pressing, lies a mole, right proud
Of that most delicate lodging. By my life,
To feed again, though full. You do remember
This stain upon her?
Another stain as big as hell can hold,
Were there no more but it.
Never count the turns. Once, and a million!
If you will swear you have not done 't, you lie,
And I will kill thee if thou dost deny
Thou 'st made me cuckold.
Her father. I'll do something.	
The government of patience. You have won.
Let's follow him and pervert the present wrath
He hath against himself.
Is there no way for men to be, but women
Must be half-workers? We are all bastards,
And that most venerable man which I
Did call my father was I know not where
When I was stamped. Some coiner with his tools
Made me a counterfeit; yet my mother seemed
The Dian of that time; so doth my wife
The nonpareil of this. O, vengeance, vengeance!
Me of my lawful pleasure she restrained
And prayed me oft forbearance; did it with
Might well have warmed old Saturn, that I thought
As chaste as unsunned snow. O, all the devils!
This yellow Iachimo in an hour, was 't not?
Or less? At first? Perchance he spoke not, but,
Like a full-acorned boar, a German one,
Cried "O!" and mounted; found no opposition
But what he looked for should oppose and she
Should from encounter guard. Could I find out
The woman's part in me--for there's no motion
That tends to vice in man but I affirm
It is the woman's part: be it lying, note it,
The woman's; flattering, hers; deceiving, hers;
Lust and rank thoughts, hers, hers; revenges, hers;
Ambitions, covetings, change of prides, disdain,
Nice longing, slanders, mutability,
All faults that have a name, nay, that hell knows,
Why, hers, in part or all, but rather all.
For even to vice
They are not constant, but are changing still
One vice but of a minute old for one
Not half so old as that. I'll write against them,
Detest them, curse them. Yet 'tis greater skill
In a true hate to pray they have their will;
The very devils cannot plague them better.
Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?
When Julius Caesar, whose remembrance yet
Lives in men's eyes and will to ears and tongues
Be theme and hearing ever, was in this Britain
And conquered it, Cassibelan, thine uncle,
Famous in Caesar's praises no whit less
Than in his feats deserving it, for him
And his succession granted Rome a tribute,
Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately
Is left untendered.
Shall be so ever.
Ere such another Julius. Britain's a world
By itself, and we will nothing pay
For wearing our own noses.
Which then they had to take from 's, to resume
We have again.--Remember, sir, my liege,
The Kings your ancestors, together with
The natural bravery of your isle, which stands
As Neptune's park, ribbed and paled in
With rocks unscalable and roaring waters,
With sands that will not bear your enemies' boats
But suck them up to th' topmast. A kind of conquest
Caesar made here, but made not here his brag
Of "came, and saw, and overcame." With shame--
The first that ever touched him--he was carried
From off our coast, twice beaten; and his shipping,
Poor ignorant baubles, on our terrible seas
Like eggshells moved upon their surges, cracked
As easily 'gainst our rocks. For joy whereof
The famed Cassibelan, who was once at point--
Made Lud's Town with rejoicing fires bright
And Britons strut with courage.
Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket or
Till the injurious Romans did extort
This tribute from us, we were free. Caesar's ambition,
Which swelled so much that it did almost stretch
The sides o' th' world, against all color here
Did put the yoke upon 's, which to shake off
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
Ourselves to be. We do say, then, to Caesar,
Our ancestor was that Mulmutius which
Ordained our laws, whose use the sword of Caesar
Hath too much mangled, whose repair and franchise
Shall, by the power we hold, be our good deed,
Though Rome be therefore angry. Mulmutius made
Who was the first of Britain which did put
His brows within a golden crown and called
Himself a king.
That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar--
Caesar, that hath more kings his servants than
Thyself domestic officers--thine enemy.
Receive it from me, then: war and confusion
In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee. Look
For fury not to be resisted. Thus defied,
Thy Caesar knighted me; my youth I spent
Much under him. Of him I gathered honor,
Which he to seek of me again perforce
Behooves me keep at utterance. I am perfect
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for
Their liberties are now in arms, a precedent
Which not to read would show the Britons cold.
So Caesar shall not find them.
All the remain is welcome.
How? Of adultery? Wherefore write you not
What monsters her accuse? Leonatus,
Is fall'n into thy ear! What false Italian,
As poisonous-tongued as handed, hath prevailed
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal? No.
She's punished for her truth and undergoes,
More goddesslike than wifelike, such assaults
As would take in some virtue. O my master,
Thy mind to her is now as low as were
Thy fortunes. How? That I should murder her,
Upon the love and truth and vows which I
Have made to thy command? I her? Her blood?
If it be so to do good service, never
Let me be counted serviceable. How look I
That I should seem to lack humanity
So much as this fact comes to?  Do 't!
The letter
That I have sent her, by her own command
Shall give thee opportunity. O damned paper,
Black as the ink that's on thee! Senseless bauble,
Art thou a fedary for this act, and look'st
So virginlike without? Lo, here she comes.
Madam, here is a letter from my lord.
Who, thy lord that is my lord, Leonatus?
That knew the stars as I his characters!
He'd lay the future open. You good gods,
Let what is here contained relish of love,
Of my lord's health, of his content (yet not
That we two are asunder; let that grieve him.
Some griefs are med'cinable; that is one of them,
For it doth physic love) of his content
All but in that. Good wax, thy leave.
Blest be
You bees that make these locks of counsel. Lovers
And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike;
Though forfeiters you cast in prison, yet
You clasp young Cupid's tables. Good news, gods!
Leonatus Posthumus.
He is at Milford Haven. Read, and tell me
How far 'tis thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day? Then, true Pisanio,
Who long'st like me to see thy lord, who long'st--
But in a fainter kind--O, not like me,
For mine's beyond beyond--say, and speak thick--
Love's counselor should fill the bores of hearing
To th' smothering of the sense--how far it is
To this same blessed Milford. And by th' way
Tell me how Wales was made so happy as
How we may steal from hence, and for the gap
That we shall make in time from our hence-going
And our return, to excuse. But first, how get hence?
Why should excuse be born or ere begot?
We'll talk of that hereafter. Prithee speak,
How many score of miles may we well rid
Madam, 's enough for you, and too much too.
Why, one that rode to 's execution, man,
Could never go so slow. I have heard of riding wagers
Where horses have been nimbler than the sands
That run i' th' clock's behalf. But this is fool'ry.
Go, bid my woman feign a sickness, say
She'll home to her father; and provide me presently
Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee.
Do as I bid thee. There's no more to say.
Accessible is none but Milford way.
Whose roof's as low as ours! Stoop, boys. This gate
Instructs you how t' adore the heavens and bows you
To a morning's holy office. The gates of monarchs
Are arched so high that giants may jet through
And keep their impious turbans on, without
Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven!
We house i' th' rock, yet use thee not so hardly
As prouder livers do.
Now for our mountain sport. Up to yond hill;
Your legs are young. I'll tread these flats. Consider,
When you above perceive me like a crow,
That it is place which lessens and sets off,
And you may then revolve what tales I have told you
Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war.
This service is not service, so being done,
But being so allowed. To apprehend thus
Draws us a profit from all things we see,
And often, to our comfort, shall we find
The sharded beetle in a safer hold
Than is the full-winged eagle. O, this life
Is nobler than attending for a check,
Richer than doing nothing for a robe,
Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk:
Such gain the cap of him that makes him fine
Yet keeps his book uncrossed. No life to ours.
Out of your proof you speak. We poor unfledged
Have never winged from view o' th' nest, nor know
What air 's from home. Haply this life is best
If quiet life be best, sweeter to you
That have a sharper known, well corresponding
With your stiff age; but unto us it is
To stride a limit.
When we are old as you? When we shall hear
The rain and wind beat dark December, how
In this our pinching cave shall we discourse
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing.
We are beastly: subtle as the fox for prey,
Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat.
Our valor is to chase what flies. Our cage
We make a choir, as doth the prisoned bird,
And sing our bondage freely.
Did you but know the city's usuries
And felt them knowingly; the art o' th' court,
As hard to leave as keep, whose top to climb
Is certain falling, or so slipp'ry that
The fear's as bad as falling; the toil o' th' war,
And hath as oft a sland'rous epitaph
As record of fair act--nay, many times
Doth ill deserve by doing well; what's worse,
Must curtsy at the censure. O boys, this story
The world may read in me. My body's marked
With Roman swords, and my report was once
First with the best of note. Cymbeline loved me,
And when a soldier was the theme, my name
Was not far off. Then was I as a tree
Whose boughs did bend with fruit. But in one night
Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves,
And left me bare to weather.
My fault being nothing, as I have told you oft,
But that two villains, whose false oaths prevailed
Before my perfect honor, swore to Cymbeline
Followed my banishment; and this twenty years
This rock and these demesnes have been my world,
Where I have lived at honest freedom, paid
More pious debts to heaven than in all
The fore-end of my time. But up to th' mountains!
This is not hunters' language. He that strikes
The venison first shall be the lord o' th' feast;
To him the other two shall minister,
And we will fear no poison, which attends
In place of greater state. I'll meet you in the valleys.
How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
These boys know little they are sons to th' King,
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
They think they are mine, and, though trained up
The roofs of palaces, and nature prompts them
In simple and low things to prince it much
Beyond the trick of others. This Polydor,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
The King his father called Guiderius--Jove!
When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
Into my story; say "Thus mine enemy fell,
And thus I set my foot on 's neck," even then
The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,
Strains his young nerves, and puts himself in posture
That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal,
Once Arviragus, in as like a figure
Strikes life into my speech and shows much more
His own conceiving. Hark, the game is roused!
Thou didst unjustly banish me; whereon,
At three and two years old I stole these babes,
Thinking to bar thee of succession as
Thou refts me of my lands. Euriphile,
Thou wast their nurse; they took thee for their
And every day do honor to her grave.
Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan called,
They take for natural father. The game is up!
Thou told'st me, when we came from horse, the place
Was near at hand. Ne'er longed my mother so
To see me first as I have now. Pisanio, man,
Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind
That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that
From th' inward of thee? One but painted thus
Would be interpreted a thing perplexed
Beyond self-explication. Put thyself
Into a havior of less fear, ere wildness
Vanquish my staider senses. What's the matter?
Why tender'st thou that paper to me with
Smile to 't before; if winterly, thou need'st
But keep that count'nance still. My husband's hand!
That drug-damned Italy hath out-craftied him,
And he's at some hard point. Speak, man! Thy tongue
May take off some extremity, which to read
Would be even mortal to me.
And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing
The most disdained of fortune.
What shall I need to draw my sword? The paper
Hath cut her throat already. No, 'tis slander,
Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue
Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath
Rides on the posting winds and doth belie
All corners of the world. Kings, queens, and states,
Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave
This viperous slander enters.--What cheer, madam?
False to his bed? What is it to be false?
To lie in watch there and to think on him?
To weep 'twixt clock and clock? If sleep charge nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him
And cry myself awake? That's false to 's bed, is it?
Thou didst accuse him of incontinency.
Thou then looked'st like a villain. Now methinks
Thy favor's good enough. Some jay of Italy,
Whose mother was her painting, hath betrayed him.
Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion,
And, for I am richer than to hang by th' walls,
Men's vows are women's traitors! All good seeming,
By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought
Put on for villainy, not born where 't grows,
But worn a bait for ladies.
True honest men, being heard like false Aeneas,
Were in his time thought false, and Sinon's weeping
Did scandal many a holy tear, took pity
From most true wretchedness. So thou, Posthumus,
Wilt lay the leaven on all proper men;
Goodly and gallant shall be false and perjured
From thy great fail.--Come, fellow, be thou honest;
Do thou thy master's bidding. When thou seest him,
Take it, and hit
The innocent mansion of my love, my heart.
Fear not; 'tis empty of all things but grief.
Thy master is not there, who was indeed
The riches of it. Do his bidding; strike.
Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause,
But now thou seem'st a coward.
Thou shalt not damn my hand.
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
No servant of thy master's. Against self-slaughter
There is a prohibition so divine
That cravens my weak hand. Come, here's my heart--
Something's afore 't. Soft, soft! We'll no defense--
Obedient as the scabbard. What is here?
The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus,
All turned to heresy? Away, away!
Corrupters of my faith, you shall no more
Be stomachers to my heart. Thus may poor fools
Believe false teachers. Though those that are betrayed
Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor
Stands in worse case of woe. And thou, Posthumus,
That didst set up
My disobedience 'gainst the King my father
And make me put into contempt the suits
Of princely fellows, shalt hereafter find
It is no act of common passage, but
To think, when thou shalt be disedged by her
That now thou tirest on, how thy memory
Will then be panged by me.--Prithee, dispatch.
The lamb entreats the butcher. Where's thy knife?
Thou art too slow to do thy master's bidding
When I desire it too.
Since I received command to do this business
Didst undertake it? Why hast thou abused
So many miles with a pretense? This place?
Mine action and thine own? Our horses' labor?
The time inviting thee? The perturbed court
For my being absent, whereunto I never
Purpose return? Why hast thou gone so far
To be unbent when thou hast ta'en thy stand,
Th' elected deer before thee?
To lose so bad employment, in the which
Hear me with patience.
Speak.
Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
Nor tent to bottom that. But speak.
Bringing me here to kill me.
But if I were as wise as honest, then
My purpose would prove well. It cannot be
But that my master is abused. Some villain,
Ay, and singular in his art, hath done
You both this cursed injury.
Some Roman courtesan?
Some bloody sign of it, for 'tis commanded
And that will well confirm it.
What shall I do the while? Where bide? How live?
Or in my life what comfort when I am
Dead to my husband?
No court, no father, nor no more ado
With that harsh, noble, simple nothing,
That Cloten, whose love suit hath been to me
As fearful as a siege.
Then not in Britain must you bide.
Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night,
Are they not but in Britain? I' th' world's volume
Our Britain seems as of it, but not in 't,
In a great pool a swan's nest. Prithee think
There's livers out of Britain.
You think of other place. Th' ambassador,
Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford Haven
Tomorrow. Now, if you could wear a mind
Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise
That which t' appear itself must not yet be
But by self-danger, you should tread a course
Pretty and full of view: yea, haply near
The residence of Posthumus; so nigh, at least,
That though his actions were not visible, yet
Report should render him hourly to your ear
As truly as he moves.
Though peril to my modesty, not death on 't,
You must forget to be a woman; change
Command into obedience, fear and niceness--
The handmaids of all women, or, more truly,
Woman it pretty self--into a waggish courage,
Ready in gibes, quick-answered, saucy, and
As quarrelous as the weasel. Nay, you must
Forget that rarest treasure of your cheek,
Exposing it--but O, the harder heart!
Alack, no remedy--to the greedy touch
Of common-kissing Titan, and forget
Your laborsome and dainty trims, wherein
You made great Juno angry.
Forethinking this, I have already fit--
That answer to them. Would you, in their serving,
And with what imitation you can borrow
From youth of such a season, 'fore noble Lucius
Present yourself, desire his service, tell him
Wherein you're happy--which will make him know,
If that his head have ear in music--doubtless
With joy he will embrace you, for he's honorable
And, doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad:
You have me, rich, and I will never fail
Beginning nor supplyment.
The gods will diet me with. Prithee, away.
There's more to be considered, but we'll even
All that good time will give us. This attempt
Well, madam, we must take a short farewell,
Lest, being missed, I be suspected of
Your carriage from the court. My noble mistress,
Here is a box. I had it from the Queen.
What's in 't is precious. If you are sick at sea
Or stomach-qualmed at land, a dram of this
Will drive away distemper. To some shade,
And fit you to your manhood. May the gods
Direct you to the best.
Attendants.]
Thus far, and so farewell.
My emperor hath wrote I must from hence,
And am right sorry that I must report you
My master's enemy.
Will not endure his yoke, and for ourself
To show less sovereignty than they must needs
Appear unkinglike.
Madam, all joy befall your Grace--and you.
My lords, you are appointed for that office.
The due of honor in no point omit.--
So, farewell, noble Lucius.
Receive it friendly, but from this time forth
Is yet to name the winner. Fare you well.
Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords,
Till he have crossed the Severn. Happiness!
He goes hence frowning, but it honors us
That we have given him cause.
Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.
Lucius hath wrote already to the Emperor
How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
Our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness.
The powers that he already hath in Gallia
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
His war for Britain.
But must be looked to speedily and strongly.
Our expectation that it would be thus
Hath made us forward. But, my gentle queen,
Where is our daughter? She hath not appeared
Before the Roman, nor to us hath tendered
The duty of the day. She looks us like
We have noted it.--Call her before us, for
We have been too slight in sufferance.
Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired
Hath her life been, the cure whereof, my lord,
Forbear sharp speeches to her. She's a lady
So tender of rebukes that words are strokes
And strokes death to her.
Can her contempt be answered?
Her chambers are all locked, and there's no answer
That will be given to th' loud'st noise we make.
My lord, when last I went to visit her,
She prayed me to excuse her keeping close;
Whereto constrained by her infirmity,
She should that duty leave unpaid to you
Which daily she was bound to proffer. This
She wished me to make known, but our great court
Made me to blame in memory.
Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I
Fear prove false!	
That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant
He hath a drug of mine. I pray his absence
Proceed by swallowing that, for he believes
It is a thing most precious. But for her,
Where is she gone? Haply despair hath seized her,
Or, winged with fervor of her love, she's flown
To her desired Posthumus. Gone she is
To death or to dishonor, and my end
Can make good use of either. She being down,
How now, my son?
Go in and cheer the King. He rages; none
Dare come about him.
This night forestall him of the coming day!
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
Than lady, ladies, woman. From every one
The best she hath, and she, of all compounded,
Outsells them all. I love her therefore, but
Disdaining me and throwing favors on
The low Posthumus slanders so her judgment
That what's else rare is choked. And in that point
To be revenged upon her. For, when fools
Shall--
Who is here? What, are you packing, sirrah?
Come hither. Ah, you precious pander! Villain,
Where is thy lady? In a word, or else
Thou art straightway with the fiends.
Where is thy lady? Or, by Jupiter--
Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus,
From whose so many weights of baseness cannot
How can she be with him? When was she missed?
He is in Rome.
No farther halting. Satisfy me home
What is become of her.
Discover where thy mistress is at once,
At the next word. No more of "worthy lord"!
Speak, or thy silence on the instant is
Thy condemnation and thy death.
This paper is the history of my knowledge
Touching her flight.	
Even to Augustus' throne.
She's far enough, and what he learns by this
May prove his travail, not her danger.
Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!
He on the ground, my speech of insultment
Be those the garments?
Would I had wings to follow it! Come, and be true.
Thou bidd'st me to my loss, for true to thee
Were to prove false, which I will never be,
To him that is most true. To Milford go,
And find not her whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow,
You heavenly blessings, on her. This fool's speed
Be crossed with slowness. Labor be his meed.
Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick
But that my resolution helps me. Milford,
When from the mountain top Pisanio showed thee,
Thou wast within a ken. O Jove, I think
Foundations fly the wretched--such, I mean,
Where they should be relieved. Two beggars told me
That have afflictions on them, knowing 'tis
When rich ones scarce tell true. To lapse in fullness
Is sorer than to lie for need, and falsehood
Is worse in kings than beggars. My dear lord,
Thou art one o' th' false ones. Now I think on thee,
My hunger's gone; but even before, I was
At point to sink for food. But what is this?
Here is a path to 't. 'Tis some savage hold.
Ere clean it o'erthrow nature, makes it valiant.
Plenty and peace breeds cowards; hardness ever
Of hardiness is mother.--Ho! Who's here?
If anything that's civil, speak; if savage,
Take or lend. Ho!--No answer? Then I'll enter.
Best draw my sword; an if mine enemy
But fear the sword like me, he'll scarcely look on 't.
Such a foe, good heavens!
Arviragus as Cadwal.]
You, Polydor, have proved best woodman and
Are master of the feast. Cadwal and I
Will play the cook and servant; 'tis our match.
The sweat of industry would dry and die
But for the end it works to. Come, our stomachs
Will make what's homely savory. Weariness
Can snore upon the flint when resty sloth
Finds the down pillow hard. Now peace be here,
Poor house, that keep'st thyself.
There is cold meat i' th' cave. We'll browse on that
Whilst what we have killed be cooked.
Stay, come
But that it eats our victuals, I should think
Here were a fairy.
By Jupiter, an angel! Or, if not,
An earthly paragon. Behold divineness
No elder than a boy.
Before I entered here, I called, and thought
To have begged or bought what I have took. Good
Gold strewed i' th' floor. Here's money for my meat.
As I had made my meal, and parted
With prayers for the provider.
All gold and silver rather turn to dirt,
As 'tis no better reckoned but of those
Who worship dirty gods.
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should
Have died had I not made it.
Fidele, sir. I have a kinsman who
Is bound for Italy. He embarked at Milford,
To whom being going, almost spent with hunger,
Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds
By this rude place we live in. Well encountered!
Ere you depart, and thanks to stay and eat it.--
Boys, bid him welcome.
Ay, bid for you as I do buy.
He is a man. I'll love him as my brother.--
And such a welcome as I'd give to him
After long absence, such is yours. Most welcome.
Be sprightly, for you fall 'mongst friends.
If brothers-- Would it had been so, that they
Had been my father's sons! Then had my prize
Been less, and so more equal ballasting
To thee, Posthumus.
Would I could free 't!
What pain it cost, what danger. Gods!
That had a court no bigger than this cave,
That did attend themselves and had the virtue
Which their own conscience sealed them, laying by
That nothing-gift of differing multitudes,
Could not outpeer these twain. Pardon me, gods!
Since Leonatus false.
Boys, we'll go dress our hunt.--Fair youth, come in.
Discourse is heavy, fasting. When we have supped,
We'll mannerly demand thee of thy story
So far as thou wilt speak it.
The night to th' owl and morn to th' lark less
This is the tenor of the Emperor's writ:
That since the common men are now in action
And that the legions now in Gallia are
Full weak to undertake our wars against
The fall'n-off Britons, that we do incite
The gentry to this business. He creates
Lucius proconsul; and to you the tribunes
For this immediate levy, he commends
His absolute commission. Long live Caesar!
Is Lucius general of the forces?
Remaining now in Gallia?
Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy
Must be supplyant. The words of your commission
Will tie you to the numbers and the time
Of their dispatch.
My horse is tied up safe. Out, sword,
Arviragus as Cadwal, and Imogen as Fidele, from the
You are not well. Remain here in the cave.
We'll come to you after hunting.
Are we not brothers?
But clay and clay differs in dignity,
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick.
Go you to hunting. I'll abide with him.
So sick I am not, yet I am not well;
But not so citizen a wanton as
To seem to die ere sick. So please you, leave me.
Stick to your journal course. The breach of custom
Is breach of all. I am ill, but your being by me
Cannot amend me. Society is no comfort
To one not sociable. I am not very sick,
Since I can reason of it. Pray you trust me here--
Stealing so poorly.
How much the quantity, the weight as much
As I do love my father.
If it be sin to say so, sir, I yoke me
In my good brother's fault. I know not why
Love's reason's without reason. The bier at door,
And a demand who is 't shall die, I'd say
Cowards father cowards and base things sire base;
Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace.
Doth miracle itself, loved before me.--
These are kind creatures. Gods, what lies I have heard!
Our courtiers say all's savage but at court;
Experience, O, thou disprov'st report!
Th' imperious seas breeds monsters; for the dish
Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish.
He said he was gentle but unfortunate,
Dishonestly afflicted but yet honest.
Thus did he answer me, yet said hereafter
We'll not be long away.
For you must be our huswife.
This youth, howe'er distressed, appears he hath had
Good ancestors.
But his neat cookery! He cut our roots in characters
And sauced our broths as Juno had been sick
And he her dieter.
Was that it was for not being such a smile,
The smile mocking the sigh that it would fly
From so divine a temple to commix
With winds that sailors rail at.
That grief and patience, rooted in them both,
Mingle their spurs together.
And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine
His perishing root with the increasing vine!
It is great morning. Come, away. Who's there?
Hath mocked me. I am faint.
Means he not us? I partly know him. 'Tis
Cloten, the son o' th' Queen. I fear some ambush.
He is but one. You and my brother search
What companies are near. Pray you, away.
Let me alone with him.	
That fly me thus? Some villain mountaineers?
More slavish did I ne'er than answering
To who? To thee? What art thou? Have not I
An arm as big as thine? A heart as big?
Thy words, I grant, are bigger, for I wear not
My dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art,
Why I should yield to thee.
Know'st me not by my clothes?
Who is thy grandfather? He made those clothes,
Which, as it seems, make thee.
My tailor made them not.
The man that gave them thee. Thou art some fool.
Hear but my name, and tremble.
Cloten, thou double villain, be thy name,
Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know
So worthy as thy birth.
Those that I reverence, those I fear--the wise;
At fools I laugh, not fear them.
When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
And on the gates of Lud's Town set your heads.
Yield, rustic mountaineer!
Cadwal.]
None in the world. You did mistake him sure.
But time hath nothing blurred those lines of favor
Which then he wore. The snatches in his voice
And burst of speaking were as his. I am absolute
You say he is so fell.
Of roaring terrors; for defect of judgment
Is oft the cause of fear.
But see, thy brother.
This Cloten was a fool, an empty purse;
There was no money in 't. Not Hercules
Could have knocked out his brains, for he had none.
Yet I not doing this, the fool had borne
My head as I do his.
Son to the Queen, after his own report,
Who called me traitor mountaineer, and swore
With his own single hand he'd take us in,
Displace our heads where, thank the gods, they
And set them on Lud's Town.
Why, worthy father, what have we to lose
But that he swore to take, our lives? The law
Protects not us. Then why should we be tender
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us,
Play judge and executioner all himself,
For we do fear the law? What company
Discover you abroad?
Can we set eye on, but in all safe reason
He must have some attendants. Though his humor
Was nothing but mutation--ay, and that
From one bad thing to worse--not frenzy,
Not absolute madness could so far have raved
To bring him here alone. Although perhaps
It may be heard at court that such as we
Cave here, hunt here, are outlaws, and in time
May make some stronger head, the which he
As it is like him--might break out and swear
He'd fetch us in, yet is 't not probable
To come alone, either he so undertaking
Or they so suffering. Then on good ground we fear,
If we do fear this body hath a tail
More perilous than the head.
Come as the gods foresay it. Howsoe'er,
My brother hath done well.
To hunt this day. The boy Fidele's sickness
Did make my way long forth.
Which he did wave against my throat, I have ta'en
His head from him. I'll throw 't into the creek
Behind our rock, and let it to the sea
And tell the fishes he's the Queen's son, Cloten.
That's all I reck.	
Would, Polydor, thou hadst not done 't, though valor
Becomes thee well enough.
So the revenge alone pursued me. Polydor,
Thou hast robbed me of this deed. I would revenges
That possible strength might meet would seek us
And put us to our answer.
We'll hunt no more today, nor seek for danger
Where there's no profit. I prithee, to our rock.
You and Fidele play the cooks. I'll stay
Till hasty Polydor return, and bring him
To dinner presently.
And praise myself for charity.	
Thou divine Nature, thou thyself thou blazon'st
In these two princely boys! They are as gentle
As zephyrs blowing below the violet,
Not wagging his sweet head; and yet as rough,
Their royal blood enchafed, as the rud'st wind
That by the top doth take the mountain pine
And make him stoop to th' vale. 'Tis wonder
That an invisible instinct should frame them
To royalty unlearned, honor untaught,
Civility not seen from other, valor
That wildly grows in them but yields a crop
As if it had been sowed. Yet still it's strange
What Cloten's being here to us portends,
Or what his death will bring us.
In embassy to his mother. His body's hostage
For his return.	
Hark, Polydor, it sounds! But what occasion
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark.
Is he at home?
What does he mean? Since death of my dear'st
It did not speak before. All solemn things
Should answer solemn accidents. The matter?
Triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys
Is jollity for apes and grief for boys.
Is Cadwal mad?
And brings the dire occasion in his arms
Of what we blame him for.
That we have made so much on. I had rather
Have skipped from sixteen years of age to sixty,
To have turned my leaping time into a crutch,
Than have seen this.
My brother wears thee not the one half so well
As when thou grew'st thyself.
Whoever yet could sound thy bottom, find
The ooze, to show what coast thy sluggish crare
Might eas'liest harbor in?--Thou blessed thing,
Jove knows what man thou mightst have made; but I,
Thou died'st, a most rare boy, of melancholy.--
How found you him?
Thus smiling, as some fly had tickled slumber,
Not as Death's dart being laughed at; his right cheek
Reposing on a cushion.
His arms thus leagued. I thought he slept, and put
My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
Answered my steps too loud.
If he be gone, he'll make his grave a bed;
With female fairies will his tomb be haunted--
And worms will not come to thee.
Whilst summer lasts and I live here, Fidele,
The flower that's like thy face, pale primrose; nor
The azured harebell, like thy veins; no, nor
The leaf of eglantine whom, not to slander,
Out-sweetened not thy breath. The ruddock would
With charitable bill--O bill, sore shaming
Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie
Without a monument--bring thee all this,
Yea, and furred moss besides, when flowers are none
To winter-ground thy corse.
And do not play in wench-like words with that
Which is so serious. Let us bury him
And not protract with admiration what
Is now due debt. To th' grave.
By good Euriphile, our mother.
And let us, Polydor, though now our voices
Have got the mannish crack, sing him to th' ground
As once to our mother; use like note and words,
Save that "Euriphile" must be "Fidele."
For notes of sorrow, out of tune, are worse
Than priests and fanes that lie.
Great griefs, I see, med'cine the less, for Cloten
Is quite forgot. He was a queen's son, boys,
And though he came our enemy, remember
He was paid for that. Though mean and mighty,
Rotting together, have one dust, yet reverence,
That angel of the world, doth make distinction
Of place 'tween high and low. Our foe was princely,
And though you took his life as being our foe,
Yet bury him as a prince.
Thersites' body is as good as Ajax'
When neither are alive.
We'll say our song the whilst.--Brother, begin.
Nay, Cadwal, we must lay his head to th' east;
My father hath a reason for 't.
Come on then, and remove him.
Song.
We have done our obsequies. Come, lay him down.
Here's a few flowers, but 'bout midnight more.
The herbs that have on them cold dew o' th' night
Are strewings fitt'st for graves. Upon their faces.--
You were as flowers, now withered. Even so
These herblets shall, which we upon you strew.--
Come on, away; apart upon our knees.
The ground that gave them first has them again.
Their pleasures here are past; so is their pain.
Yes, sir, to Milford Haven. Which is the way?
Ods pittikins, can it be six mile yet?
But soft! No bedfellow? O gods and goddesses!
These flowers are like the pleasures of the world,
This bloody man the care on 't. I hope I dream,
For so I thought I was a cave-keeper
And cook to honest creatures. But 'tis not so.
Which the brain makes of fumes. Our very eyes
Are sometimes like our judgments, blind. Good faith,
Yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity
As a wren's eye, feared gods, a part of it!
The dream's here still. Even when I wake it is
Without me as within me, not imagined, felt.
His foot Mercurial, his Martial thigh,
The brawns of Hercules; but his Jovial face--
Murder in heaven! How? 'Tis gone. Pisanio,
All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
And mine to boot, be darted on thee! Thou,
Conspired with that irregulous devil Cloten,
Hath here cut off my lord. To write and read
Be henceforth treacherous. Damned Pisanio
Hath with his forged letters--damned Pisanio--
From this most bravest vessel of the world
Struck the maintop. O Posthumus, alas,
Where is thy head? Where's that? Ay me, where's that?
Pisanio might have killed thee at the heart
And left this head on. How should this be? Pisanio?
Have laid this woe here. O, 'tis pregnant, pregnant!
The drug he gave me, which he said was precious
And cordial to me, have I not found it
Murd'rous to th' senses? That confirms it home.
This is Pisanio's deed, and Cloten. O,
Give color to my pale cheek with thy blood,
That we the horrider may seem to those
Which chance to find us. O my lord! My lord!
To them the legions garrisoned in Gallia,
After your will, have crossed the sea, attending
You here at Milford Haven with your ships.
They are here in readiness.
The Senate hath stirred up the confiners
And gentlemen of Italy, most willing spirits
That promise noble service, and they come
Under the conduct of bold Iachimo,
Siena's brother.
With the next benefit o' th' wind.
Makes our hopes fair. Command our present numbers
Be mustered; bid the Captains look to 't.--Now, sir,
What have you dreamed of late of this war's purpose?
Last night the very gods showed me a vision--
From the spongy south to this part of the west,
There vanished in the sunbeams, which portends--
Unless my sins abuse my divination--
Success to th' Roman host.
And never false.--Soft, ho, what trunk is here
Without his top? The ruin speaks that sometime
It was a worthy building. How, a page?
Or dead or sleeping on him? But dead rather,
For nature doth abhor to make his bed
With the defunct or sleep upon the dead.
Let's see the boy's face.
He'll then instruct us of this body.--Young one,
Inform us of thy fortunes, for it seems
They crave to be demanded. Who is this
Thou mak'st thy bloody pillow? Or who was he
That, otherwise than noble nature did,
Hath altered that good picture? What's thy interest
In this sad wrack? How came 't? Who is 't?
What art thou?
Nothing to be were better. This was my master,
That here by mountaineers lies slain. Alas,
There is no more such masters. I may wander
From east to occident, cry out for service,
Try many, all good, serve truly, never
Find such another master.
Thou mov'st no less with thy complaining than
Thy master in bleeding. Say his name, good friend.
Richard du Champ.  If I do lie and do
No harm by it, though the gods hear, I hope
They'll pardon it.--Say you, sir?
Thou dost approve thyself the very same;
Thy name well fits thy faith, thy faith thy name.
Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say
Thou shalt be so well mastered, but be sure
No less beloved. The Roman Emperor's letters
Sent by a consul to me should not sooner
Than thine own worth prefer thee. Go with me.
As these poor pickaxes can dig; and when
With wild-wood leaves and weeds I ha' strewed his
And on it said a century of prayers,
Such as I can, twice o'er, I'll weep and sigh,
And leaving so his service, follow you,
So please you entertain me.
And rather father thee than master thee.--My friends,
The boy hath taught us manly duties. Let us
Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can,
And make him with our pikes and partisans
By thee to us, and he shall be interred
As soldiers can. Be cheerful; wipe thine eyes.
Some falls are means the happier to arise.
Again, and bring me word how 'tis with her.
How deeply you at once do touch me! Imogen,
The great part of my comfort, gone; my queen
Upon a desperate bed, and in a time
When fearful wars point at me; her son gone,
So needful for this present. It strikes me past
The hope of comfort.--But for thee, fellow,
Who needs must know of her departure and
Dost seem so ignorant, we'll enforce it from thee
By a sharp torture.
Nor when she purposes return. Beseech your
Highness,
Hold me your loyal servant.
The day that she was missing, he was here.
All parts of his subjection loyally. For Cloten,
There wants no diligence in seeking him,
And will no doubt be found.
Does yet depend.
The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn,
Are landed on your coast with a supply
Of Roman gentlemen by the Senate sent.
Now for the counsel of my son and queen!
Your preparation can affront no less
Than what you hear of. Come more, for more you're
The want is but to put those powers in motion
That long to move.
And meet the time as it seeks us. We fear not
What can from Italy annoy us, but
We grieve at chances here. Away.
Nor hear I from my mistress, who did promise
To yield me often tidings. Neither know I
What is betid to Cloten, but remain
Perplexed in all. The heavens still must work.
Wherein I am false I am honest; not true, to be true.
These present wars shall find I love my country,
Even to the note o' th' King, or I'll fall in them.
All other doubts, by time let them be cleared.
Fortune brings in some boats that are not steered.
The noise is round about us.
What pleasure, sir, find we in life, to lock it
From action and adventure?
Have we in hiding us? This way the Romans
Must or for Britons slay us or receive us
For barbarous and unnatural revolts
During their use, and slay us after.
We'll higher to the mountains, there secure us.
To the King's party there's no going. Newness
Of Cloten's death--we being not known, not mustered
Among the bands--may drive us to a render
Where we have lived, and so extort from 's that
Which we have done, whose answer would be death
Drawn on with torture.
In such a time nothing becoming you
Nor satisfying us.
That when they hear the Roman horses neigh,
Behold their quartered fires, have both their eyes
And ears so cloyed importantly as now,
That they will waste their time upon our note,
To know from whence we are.
Of many in the army. Many years,
Though Cloten then but young, you see not wore him
From my remembrance. And besides, the King
Hath not deserved my service nor your loves,
Who find in my exile the want of breeding,
The certainty of this hard life, aye hopeless
To have the courtesy your cradle promised,
But to be still hot summer's tanlings and
The shrinking slaves of winter.
Better to cease to be. Pray, sir, to th' army.
So out of thought, and thereto so o'ergrown,
Cannot be questioned.
Did see man die, scarce ever looked on blood
But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison!
Never bestrid a horse save one that had
Nor iron on his heel! I am ashamed
To look upon the holy sun, to have
The benefit of his blest beams, remaining
So long a poor unknown.
If you will bless me, sir, and give me leave,
The hazard therefore due fall on me by
The hands of Romans.
No reason I--since of your lives you set
So slight a valuation--should reserve
My cracked one to more care. Have with you, boys!
If in your country wars you chance to die,
That is my bed, too, lads, and there I'll lie.
Lead, lead.  The time seems long; their
Till it fly out and show them princes born.
Yea, bloody cloth, I'll keep thee, for I wished
Thou shouldst be colored thus. You married ones,
If each of you should take this course, how many
Must murder wives much better than themselves
For wrying but a little! O Pisanio,
Every good servant does not all commands;
No bond but to do just ones. Gods, if you
Should have ta'en vengeance on my faults, I never
Had lived to put on this; so had you saved
The noble Imogen to repent, and struck
Me, wretch more worth your vengeance. But, alack,
You snatch some hence for little faults; that's love,
To have them fall no more; you some permit
To second ills with ills, each elder worse,
And make them dread it, to the doers' thrift.
But Imogen is your own. Do your best wills,
And make me blest to obey. I am brought hither
Among th' Italian gentry, and to fight
Against my lady's kingdom. 'Tis enough
That, Britain, I have killed thy mistress. Peace,
Hear patiently my purpose. I'll disrobe me
Of these Italian weeds and suit myself
As does a Briton peasant. So I'll fight
Against the part I come with; so I'll die
For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life
Is every breath a death. And thus, unknown,
Pitied nor hated, to the face of peril
Myself I'll dedicate. Let me make men know
More valor in me than my habits show.
Gods, put the strength o' th' Leonati in me.
To shame the guise o' th' world, I will begin
The fashion: less without and more within.
Posthumus. He vanquisheth and disarmeth Iachimo,
The heaviness and guilt within my bosom
Takes off my manhood. I have belied a lady,
The Princess of this country, and the air on 't
Revengingly enfeebles me; or could this carl,
In my profession? Knighthoods and honors, borne
As I wear mine, are titles but of scorn.
If that thy gentry, Britain, go before
This lout as he exceeds our lords, the odds
Is that we scarce are men and you are gods.
Guiderius as Polydor, and Arviragus as Cadwal.]
Stand, stand! We have th' advantage of the ground.
The lane is guarded. Nothing routs us but
The villainy of our fears.
Cymbeline and exit. Then enter Lucius, Iachimo, and
Imogen as Fidele.]
Away, boy, from the troops, and save thyself,
For friends kill friends, and the disorder's such
As war were hoodwinked.
It is a day turned strangely. Or betimes
Let's reinforce, or fly.
Cam'st thou from where they made the stand?
Though you, it seems, come from the fliers.
No blame be to you, sir, for all was lost,
But that the heavens fought. The King himself
Of his wings destitute, the army broken,
And but the backs of Britons seen, all flying
Through a strait lane; the enemy full-hearted,
Lolling the tongue with slaught'ring, having work
More plentiful than tools to do 't, struck down
Some mortally, some slightly touched, some falling
Merely through fear, that the strait pass was dammed
With dead men hurt behind and cowards living
To die with lengthened shame.
Close by the battle, ditched, and walled with turf;
Which gave advantage to an ancient soldier,
An honest one, I warrant, who deserved
So long a breeding as his white beard came to,
In doing this for 's country. Athwart the lane,
He with two striplings--lads more like to run
The country base than to commit such slaughter,
With faces fit for masks, or rather fairer
Than those for preservation cased or shame--
Made good the passage, cried to those that fled
To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards. Stand,
Or we are Romans and will give you that
Like beasts which you shun beastly, and may save
But to look back in frown. Stand, stand!" These three,
Three thousand confident, in act as many--
For three performers are the file when all
The rest do nothing--with this word "Stand, stand,"
Accommodated by the place, more charming
With their own nobleness, which could have turned
Part shame, part spirit renewed; that some, turned
But by example--O, a sin in war,
Damned in the first beginners!--gan to look
The way that they did and to grin like lions
Upon the pikes o' th' hunters. Then began
Chickens the way which they stooped eagles; slaves
The strides they victors made; and now our
Like fragments in hard voyages, became
The life o' th' need. Having found the backdoor open
Of the unguarded hearts, heavens, how they wound!
Some slain before, some dying, some their friends
Are now each one the slaughterman of twenty.
Those that would die or ere resist are grown
The mortal bugs o' th' field.
Nay, do not wonder at it. You are made
Rather to wonder at the things you hear
Than to work any. Will you rhyme upon 't
And vent it for a mock'ry? Here is one:
Preserved the Britons, was the Romans' bane."
Nay, be not angry, sir.
Who dares not stand his foe, I'll be his friend;
For if he'll do as he is made to do,
You have put me into rhyme.
Still going? This is a lord! O noble misery,
To be i' th' field and ask "What news?" of me!
Today how many would have given their honors
To have saved their carcasses, took heel to do 't,
And yet died too! I, in mine own woe charmed,
Could not find Death where I did hear him groan,
Nor feel him where he struck. Being an ugly monster,
Sweet words, or hath more ministers than we
That draw his knives i' th' war. Well, I will find him;
For being now a favorer to the Briton,
No more a Briton. 
The part I came in. Fight I will no more,
But yield me to the veriest hind that shall
Once touch my shoulder. Great the slaughter is
Here made by th' Roman; great the answer be
Britons must take. For me, my ransom's death.
On either side I come to spend my breath,
Which neither here I'll keep nor bear again,
But end it by some means for Imogen.
Great Jupiter be praised, Lucius is taken!
There was a fourth man in a silly habit
That gave th' affront with them.
But none of 'em can be found.--Stand. Who's there?
Who had not now been drooping here if seconds
Had answered him.
What crows have pecked them here. He brags his
As if he were of note. Bring him to th' King.
Guiderius as Polydor, Arviragus as Cadwal, Pisanio,
Soldiers, and Roman captives. The Captains present
Posthumus to Cymbeline, who delivers him over to a
Jailer.]
You shall not now be stol'n; you have locks upon you.
So graze as you find pasture.
Most welcome, bondage, for thou art a way,
Than one that's sick o' th' gout, since he had rather
Groan so in perpetuity than be cured
By th' sure physician, Death, who is the key
More than my shanks and wrists. You good gods,
The penitent instrument to pick that bolt,
Then free forever. Is 't enough I am sorry?
So children temporal fathers do appease;
Gods are more full of mercy. Must I repent,
Desired more than constrained. To satisfy,
If of my freedom 'tis the main part, take
No stricter render of me than my all.
Who of their broken debtors take a third,
On their abatement. That's not my desire.
For Imogen's dear life take mine; and though
Though light, take pieces for the figure's sake;
You rather mine, being yours. And so, great powers,
If you will take this audit, take this life
And cancel these cold bonds. O Imogen,
Leonatus, father to Posthumus, an old man attired like
Leonati, brothers to Posthumus, with wounds as they
No more, thou Thunder-master, show
With Mars fall out, with Juno chide,
Hath my poor boy done aught but well,
Whose father then--as men report
Thou shouldst have been, and shielded him
Lucina lent not me her aid,
That from me was Posthumus ripped,
Great Nature, like his ancestry,
That he deserved the praise o' th' world
When once he was mature for man,
That could stand up his parallel
In eye of Imogen, that best
With marriage wherefore was he mocked,
From Leonati seat, and cast
Why did you suffer Iachimo,
To taint his nobler heart and brain
And to become the geck and scorn
For this, from stiller seats we came,
That striking in our country's cause
Our fealty and Tenantius' right
Like hardiment Posthumus hath
Then, Jupiter, thou king of gods,
The graces for his merits due,
Thy crystal window ope; look out.
Upon a valiant race thy harsh
Since, Jupiter, our son is good,
Peep through thy marble mansion. Help,
To th' shining synod of the rest
Help, Jupiter, or we appeal
No more, you petty spirits of region low,
Accuse the Thunderer, whose bolt, you know,
Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and rest
Be not with mortal accidents oppressed.
Whom best I love I cross, to make my gift,
Your low-laid son our godhead will uplift.
Our Jovial star reigned at his birth, and in
He shall be lord of Lady Imogen,
This tablet lay upon his breast, wherein
And so away. No farther with your din
Mount, eagle, to my palace crystalline.	
He came in thunder. His celestial breath
Was sulphurous to smell. The holy eagle
Stooped as to foot us. His ascension is
More sweet than our blest fields; his royal bird
Preens the immortal wing and cloys his beak,
As when his god is pleased.
The marble pavement closes; he is entered
His radiant roof. Away, and, to be blest,
Let us with care perform his great behest.
Sleep, thou hast been a grandsire and begot
Gone! They went hence so soon as they were born.
And so I am awake. Poor wretches that depend
On greatness' favor dream as I have done,
Wake, and find nothing. But, alas, I swerve.
Many dream not to find, neither deserve,
And yet are steeped in favors; so am I
That have this golden chance and know not why.
What fairies haunt this ground? A book? O rare one,
Be not, as is our fangled world, a garment
Nobler than that it covers. Let thy effects
So follow, to be, most unlike our courtiers,
As good as promise.
Whenas a lion's whelp shall, to himself unknown,
Tongue and brain not; either both or nothing,
Or senseless speaking, or a speaking such
As sense cannot untie. Be what it is,
The action of my life is like it, which
And how you shall speed in your journey's end, I
Polydor, Arviragus as Cadwal, Pisanio, Attendants,
Stand by my side, you whom the gods have made
Preservers of my throne. Woe is my heart
That the poor soldier that so richly fought,
Whose rags shamed gilded arms, whose naked breast
Stepped before targes of proof, cannot be found.
He shall be happy that can find him, if
Our grace can make him so.
Such noble fury in so poor a thing,
Such precious deeds in one that promised naught
But beggary and poor looks.
He hath been searched among the dead and living,
But no trace of him.
To my grief, I am
The heir of his reward, which I will add
To you, the liver, heart, and brain of Britain,
By whom I grant she lives. 'Tis now the time
To ask of whence you are. Report it.
In Cambria are we born, and gentlemen.
Further to boast were neither true nor modest,
Unless I add we are honest.
Arise my knights o' th' battle. I create you
Companions to our person, and will fit you
With dignities becoming your estates.	
There's business in these faces. Why so sadly
Greet you our victory? You look like Romans,
And not o' th' court of Britain.
To sour your happiness I must report
The Queen is dead.
Would this report become? But I consider
By med'cine life may be prolonged, yet death
Will seize the doctor too. How ended she?
With horror, madly dying, like her life,
Which, being cruel to the world, concluded
Most cruel to herself. What she confessed
Can trip me if I err, who with wet cheeks
Were present when she finished.
First, she confessed she never loved you, only
Affected greatness got by you, not you;
Married your royalty, was wife to your place,
Abhorred your person.
And but she spoke it dying, I would not
Believe her lips in opening it. Proceed.
Your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love
With such integrity, she did confess
Was as a scorpion to her sight, whose life,
But that her flight prevented it, she had
Ta'en off by poison.
Who is 't can read a woman? Is there more?
More, sir, and worse. She did confess she had
For you a mortal mineral which, being took,
Should by the minute feed on life and, ling'ring,
By inches waste you. In which time she purposed,
By watching, weeping, tendance, kissing, to
When she had fitted you with her craft, to work
Her son into th' adoption of the crown;
But failing of her end by his strange absence,
Grew shameless desperate; opened, in despite
Of heaven and men, her purposes; repented
The evils she hatched were not effected; so
Despairing died.
Were not in fault, for she was beautiful;
Mine ears that heard her flattery; nor my heart,
That thought her like her seeming. It had been vicious
To have mistrusted her. Yet, O my daughter,
That it was folly in me thou mayst say,
And prove it in thy feeling. Heaven mend all.
Thou com'st not, Caius, now for tribute. That
The Britons have razed out, though with the loss
Of many a bold one, whose kinsmen have made suit
That their good souls may be appeased with slaughter
Of you their captives, which ourself have granted.
So think of your estate.
Consider, sir, the chance of war. The day
Was yours by accident. Had it gone with us,
We should not, when the blood was cool, have
Our prisoners with the sword. But since the gods
Will have it thus, that nothing but our lives
May be called ransom, let it come. Sufficeth
Augustus lives to think on 't; and so much
For my peculiar care. This one thing only
Let him be ransomed. Never master had
So tender over his occasions, true,
So feat, so nurselike. Let his virtue join
With my request, which I'll make bold your Highness
Cannot deny. He hath done no Briton harm,
Though he have served a Roman. Save him, sir,
And spare no blood beside.
His favor is familiar to me.--Boy,
Thou hast looked thyself into my grace
And art mine own. I know not why, wherefore,
To say "Live, boy." Ne'er thank thy master. Live,
And ask of Cymbeline what boon thou wilt,
Fitting my bounty and thy state, I'll give it,
Yea, though thou do demand a prisoner,
The noblest ta'en.
And yet I know thou wilt.
There's other work in hand. I see a thing
Bitter to me as death. Your life, good master,
Must shuffle for itself.
He leaves me, scorns me. Briefly die their joys
That place them on the truth of girls and boys.
Why stands he so perplexed?
What's best to ask. Know'st him thou look'st on?
Speak.
Wilt have him live? Is he thy kin? Thy friend?
He is a Roman, no more kin to me
Than I to your Highness, who, being born your vassal,
Am something nearer.
To give me hearing.
And lend my best attention. What's thy name?
Fidele, sir.
Is not this boy revived from death?
Not more resembles that sweet rosy lad
Who died, and was Fidele. What think you?
Peace, peace. See further. He eyes us not. Forbear.
Creatures may be alike. Were 't he, I am sure
He would have spoke to us.
Be silent. Let's see further.
Since she is living, let the time run on
To good or bad.
Make thy demand aloud.  Sir, step
Give answer to this boy, and do it freely,
Or by our greatness and the grace of it,
Which is our honor, bitter torture shall
Winnow the truth from falsehood.--On. Speak to
My boon is that this gentleman may render
Of whom he had this ring.
That diamond upon your finger, say
How came it yours.
Thou 'lt torture me to leave unspoken that
Which to be spoke would torture thee.
Which torments me to conceal. By villainy
Whom thou didst banish, and--which more may
As it doth me--a nobler sir ne'er lived
All that belongs to this.
For whom my heart drops blood and my false spirits
Quail to remember--Give me leave; I faint.
My daughter? What of her? Renew thy strength.
Than die ere I hear more. Strive, man, and speak.
Upon a time--unhappy was the clock
That struck the hour!--it was in Rome--accursed
The mansion where!--'twas at a feast--O, would
Our viands had been poisoned, or at least
Those which I heaved to head!--the good
Posthumus--
What should I say? He was too good to be
Where ill men were, and was the best of all
Amongst the rar'st of good ones--sitting sadly,
Hearing us praise our loves of Italy
For beauty that made barren the swelled boast
Of him that best could speak; for feature, laming
The shrine of Venus or straight-pight Minerva,
Postures beyond brief nature; for condition,
Loves woman for, besides that hook of wiving,
Fairness which strikes the eye--
Come to the matter.
Unless thou wouldst grieve quickly. This Posthumus,
Most like a noble lord in love and one
That had a royal lover, took his hint,
And, not dispraising whom we praised--therein
He was as calm as virtue--he began
His mistress' picture; which by his tongue being made
And then a mind put in 't, either our brags
Were cracked of kitchen trulls, or his description
Proved us unspeaking sots.
Your daughter's chastity--there it begins.
He spake of her as Dian had hot dreams
And she alone were cold; whereat I, wretch,
Made scruple of his praise and wagered with him
Pieces of gold 'gainst this, which then he wore
Upon his honored finger, to attain
In suit the place of 's bed and win this ring
By hers and mine adultery. He, true knight,
No lesser of her honor confident
Than I did truly find her, stakes this ring,
And would so, had it been a carbuncle
Of Phoebus' wheel, and might so safely, had it
Been all the worth of 's car. Away to Britain
Post I in this design. Well may you, sir,
Remember me at court, where I was taught
Of your chaste daughter the wide difference
Of hope, not longing, mine Italian brain
Gan in your duller Britain operate
Most vilely; for my vantage, excellent.
And to be brief, my practice so prevailed
That I returned with simular proof enough
To make the noble Leonatus mad
By wounding his belief in her renown
With tokens thus and thus; averring notes
Of chamber-hanging, pictures, this her bracelet--
Of secret on her person, that he could not
But think her bond of chastity quite cracked,
Methinks I see him now--
Italian fiend.--Ay me, most credulous fool,
Egregious murderer, thief, anything
That's due to all the villains past, in being,
To come. O, give me cord, or knife, or poison,
Some upright justicer.--Thou, king, send out
For torturers ingenious. It is I
That all th' abhorred things o' th' Earth amend
By being worse than they. I am Posthumus,
That killed thy daughter--villainlike, I lie--
That caused a lesser villain than myself,
Of virtue was she, yea, and she herself.
Spit and throw stones, cast mire upon me, set
The dogs o' th' street to bay me. Every villain
Be called Posthumus Leonatus, and
Be villainy less than 'twas. O Imogen!
My queen, my life, my wife! O Imogen,
Imogen, Imogen!
Hear, hear--
Shall 's have a play of this? Thou scornful page,
There lie thy part.	
Mine and your mistress! O my lord Posthumus,
You ne'er killed Imogen till now! Help, help!
Mine honored lady--
How comes these staggers on me?
If this be so, the gods do mean to strike me
To death with mortal joy.
Thou gav'st me poison. Dangerous fellow, hence.
Breathe not where princes are.
Lady, the gods throw stones of sulfur on me if
That box I gave you was not thought by me
New matter still.
Which must approve thee honest. "If Pisanio
Have," said she, "given his mistress that confection
Which I gave him for cordial, she is served
As I would serve a rat."
The Queen, sir, very oft importuned me
To temper poisons for her, still pretending
The satisfaction of her knowledge only
In killing creatures vile, as cats and dogs,
Of no esteem. I, dreading that her purpose
Was of more danger, did compound for her
The present power of life, but in short time
All offices of nature should again
Do their due functions.--Have you ta'en of it?
Most like I did, for I was dead.
There was our error.
Why did you throw your wedded lady from you?
Think that you are upon a rock, and now
Throw me again.	
Till the tree die.
What, mak'st thou me a dullard in this act?
Wilt thou not speak to me?
Though you did love this youth, I blame you not.
You had a motive for 't.
Prove holy water on thee. Imogen,
Thy mother's dead.
That we meet here so strangely. But her son
Is gone, we know not how nor where.
Now fear is from me, I'll speak truth. Lord Cloten,
Upon my lady's missing, came to me
With his sword drawn, foamed at the mouth, and
If I discovered not which way she was gone,
It was my instant death. By accident,
Then in my pocket, which directed him
To seek her on the mountains near to Milford;
Where, in a frenzy, in my master's garments,
Which he enforced from me, away he posts
With unchaste purpose and with oath to violate
My lady's honor. What became of him
Pluck a hard sentence. Prithee, valiant youth,
Deny 't again.
Were nothing princelike, for he did provoke me
With language that would make me spurn the sea
If it could so roar to me. I cut off 's head,
And am right glad he is not standing here
To tell this tale of mine.
By thine own tongue thou art condemned and must
Endure our law. Thou 'rt dead.
And take him from our presence.
This man is better than the man he slew,
As well descended as thyself, and hath
More of thee merited than a band of Clotens
Had ever scar for.--Let his arms alone.
They were not born for bondage.
Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for
By tasting of our wrath? How of descent
As good as we?
And thou shalt die for 't.
But I will prove that two on 's are as good
As I have given out him.--My sons, I must
For mine own part unfold a dangerous speech,
Though haply well for you.
And our good his.
Thou hadst, great king, a subject who
Was called Belarius.
Assumed this age; indeed a banished man,
The whole world shall not save him.
First pay me for the nursing of thy sons
And let it be confiscate all, so soon
As I have received it.
Ere I arise I will prefer my sons,
Then spare not the old father. Mighty sir,
These two young gentlemen that call me father
And think they are my sons are none of mine.
They are the issue of your loins, my liege,
And blood of your begetting.
So sure as you your father's. I, old Morgan,
Am that Belarius whom you sometime banished.
Your pleasure was my mere offense, my punishment
Itself, and all my treason. That I suffered
Was all the harm I did. These gentle princes--
For such and so they are--these twenty years
Have I trained up; those arts they have as I
Could put into them. My breeding was, sir, as
Your Highness knows. Their nurse Euriphile,
Whom for the theft I wedded, stole these children
Upon my banishment. I moved her to 't,
Having received the punishment before
For that which I did then. Beaten for loyalty
Excited me to treason. Their dear loss,
The more of you 'twas felt, the more it shaped
Unto my end of stealing them. But, gracious sir,
Here are your sons again, and I must lose
Two of the sweet'st companions in the world.
The benediction of these covering heavens
Fall on their heads like dew, for they are worthy
To inlay heaven with stars.	
The service that you three have done is more
Unlike than this thou tell'st. I lost my children.
If these be they, I know not how to wish
This gentleman whom I call Polydor,
Most worthy prince, as yours is true Guiderius;
This gentleman, my Cadwal, Arviragus,
Your younger princely son. He, sir, was lapped
In a most curious mantle, wrought by th' hand
Of his queen mother, which for more probation
Upon his neck a mole, a sanguine star.
It was a mark of wonder.
Who hath upon him still that natural stamp.
It was wise Nature's end in the donation
To be his evidence now.
Rejoiced deliverance more.--Blest pray you be,
That after this strange starting from your orbs,
You may reign in them now.--O Imogen,
Thou hast lost by this a kingdom!
Have we thus met? O, never say hereafter
But I am truest speaker. You called me "brother"
When I was but your sister; I you "brothers"
When we were so indeed.
Ay, my good lord.
Continued so until we thought he died.
By the Queen's dram she swallowed.
When shall I hear all through? This fierce
Hath to it circumstantial branches which
Distinction should be rich in. Where, how lived you?
And when came you to serve our Roman captive?
How parted with your brothers? How first met
Why fled you from the court? And whither?
And your three motives to the battle, with
And all the other by-dependences
From chance to chance; but nor the time nor place
Will serve our long interrogatories. See,
Posthumus anchors upon Imogen;
And she, like harmless lightning, throws her eye
On him, her brothers, me, her master, hitting
Each object with a joy; the counterchange
Is severally in all. Let's quit this ground,
And smoke the temple with our sacrifices.
Thou art my brother, so we'll hold thee ever.
You are my father too, and did relieve me
To see this gracious season.
Save these in bonds; let them be joyful too,
For they shall taste our comfort.
The forlorn soldier that so nobly fought,
He would have well becomed this place and graced
The thankings of a king.
The soldier that did company these three
In poor beseeming; 'twas a fitment for
The purpose I then followed. That I was he,
Speak, Iachimo. I had you down and might
Have made you finish.
But now my heavy conscience sinks my knee,
As then your force did. Take that life, beseech you,
Which I so often owe; but your ring first,
And here the bracelet of the truest princess
That ever swore her faith.
The power that I have on you is to spare you;
The malice towards you to forgive you. Live
And deal with others better.
We'll learn our freeness of a son-in-law:
Pardon's the word to all.	
As you did mean indeed to be our brother.
Joyed are we that you are.
Your servant, princes.--Good my lord of Rome,
Call forth your soothsayer. As I slept, methought
Great Jupiter upon his eagle backed
Appeared to me, with other spritely shows
Of mine own kindred. When I waked, I found
This label on my bosom, whose containing
Is so from sense in hardness that I can
Make no collection of it. Let him show
His skill in the construction.
Here, my good lord.
Thou, Leonatus, art the lion's whelp.
The fit and apt construction of thy name,
Being Leo-natus, doth import so much.
Which we call "mollis aer," and "mollis aer"
We term it "mulier," which "mulier" I divine
Is this most constant wife; who, even now,
Answering the letter of the oracle,
With this most tender air.
The lofty cedar, royal Cymbeline,
Personates thee; and thy lopped branches point
Thy two sons forth, who, by Belarius stol'n,
For many years thought dead, are now revived,
To the majestic cedar joined, whose issue
Promises Britain peace and plenty.
My peace we will begin. And, Caius Lucius,
Although the victor, we submit to Caesar
And to the Roman Empire, promising
To pay our wonted tribute, from the which
We were dissuaded by our wicked queen,
Whom heavens in justice both on her and hers
Have laid most heavy hand.
The fingers of the powers above do tune
The harmony of this peace. The vision
Which I made known to Lucius ere the stroke
Of this yet scarce-cold battle at this instant
Is full accomplished. For the Roman eagle,
From south to west on wing soaring aloft,
Lessened herself and in the beams o' th' sun
So vanished; which foreshowed our princely eagle,
Th' imperial Caesar, should again unite
His favor with the radiant Cymbeline,
Which shines here in the west.
And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils
From our blest altars. Publish we this peace
To all our subjects. Set we forward. Let
Friendly together. So through Lud's Town march,
And in the temple of great Jupiter
Our peace we'll ratify, seal it with feasts.
Set on there. Never was a war did cease,
Ere bloody hands were washed, with such a peace.
Nay, but this dotage of our general's
That o'er the files and musters of the war
Have glowed like plated Mars, now bend, now turn
The office and devotion of their view
Upon a tawny front. His captain's heart,
Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst
The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper
And is become the bellows and the fan
To cool a gypsy's lust.
Look where they come.
Take but good note, and you shall see in him
The triple pillar of the world transformed
Into a strumpet's fool. Behold and see.
If it be love indeed, tell me how much.
There's beggary in the love that can be reckoned.
Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new
Earth.
Fulvia perchance is angry. Or who knows
If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent
His powerful mandate to you: "Do this, or this;
Take in that kingdom, and enfranchise that.
Perform 't, or else we damn thee."
You must not stay here longer; your dismission
Is come from Caesar. Therefore hear it, Antony.
Where's Fulvia's process? Caesar's, I would say--
Call in the messengers. As I am Egypt's queen,
Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine
Is Caesar's homager; else so thy cheek pays shame
When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds. The messengers!
Let Rome in Tiber melt and the wide arch
Of the ranged empire fall. Here is my space.
Kingdoms are clay. Our dungy earth alike
Feeds beast as man. The nobleness of life
Is to do thus; when such a mutual pair
And such a twain can do 't, in which I bind,
On pain of punishment, the world to weet
We stand up peerless.
Why did he marry Fulvia and not love her?
Will be himself.
Now for the love of Love and her soft hours,
Let's not confound the time with conference harsh.
There's not a minute of our lives should stretch
Without some pleasure now. What sport tonight?
Hear the ambassadors.
Whom everything becomes--to chide, to laugh,
To weep; whose every passion fully strives
To make itself, in thee, fair and admired!
No messenger but thine, and all alone
Tonight we'll wander through the streets and note
The qualities of people. Come, my queen,
Last night you did desire it. 
Speak not to us.
Is Caesar with Antonius prized so slight?
Sir, sometimes when he is not Antony
He comes too short of that great property
Which still should go with Antony.
That he approves the common liar who
Thus speaks of him at Rome; but I will hope
Of better deeds tomorrow. Rest you happy!
Lucillius, Charmian, Iras, Mardian the Eunuch, Alexas,
Alexas, almost most absolute Alexas, where's the
Is this the man?--Is 't you, sir, that know things?
In nature's infinite book of secrecy
Bring in the banquet quickly, wine enough
Cleopatra's health to drink.
You shall be yet far fairer than you are.
You shall be more beloving than beloved.
You shall outlive the lady whom you serve.
You have seen and proved a fairer former fortune
Than that which is to approach.
If every of your wishes had a womb,
And fertile every wish, a million.
Isis, keep decorum and fortune him accordingly.
He was disposed to mirth, but on the sudden
Seek him and bring him hither.--Where's Alexas?
Here at your service. My lord approaches.
We will not look upon him. Go with us.
Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.
But soon that war had end, and the time's state
Made friends of them, jointing their force 'gainst
Caesar,
Whose better issue in the war from Italy
Upon the first encounter drave them.
The nature of bad news infects the teller.
When it concerns the fool or coward. On.
Things that are past are done, with me. 'Tis thus:
Who tells me true, though in his tale lie death,
This is stiff news--hath with his Parthian force
Extended Asia: from Euphrates
His conquering banner shook, from Syria
To Lydia and to Ionia,
Whilst--
Speak to me home; mince not the general tongue.
Name Cleopatra as she is called in Rome;
Rail thou in Fulvia's phrase, and taunt my faults
With such full license as both truth and malice
Have power to utter. O, then we bring forth weeds
When our quick winds lie still, and our ills told us
Is as our earing. Fare thee well awhile.
From Sicyon how the news? Speak there.
The man from Sicyon--
He stays upon your will.
These strong Egyptian fetters I must break,
Or lose myself in dotage.
What are you?
Fulvia thy wife is dead.
Her length of sickness, with what else more serious
Importeth thee to know, this bears.
There's a great spirit gone! Thus did I desire it.
What our contempts doth often hurl from us,
We wish it ours again. The present pleasure,
By revolution lowering, does become
The opposite of itself. She's good, being gone.
The hand could pluck her back that shoved her on.
Ten thousand harms more than the ills I know
My idleness doth hatch.--How now, Enobarbus!
When it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a
Earth; comforting therein, that when old robes are
The business she hath broached in the state
Cannot endure my absence.
No more light answers. Let our officers
Have notice what we purpose. I shall break
The cause of our expedience to the Queen
And get her leave to part. For not alone
The death of Fulvia, with more urgent touches,
Do strongly speak to us, but the letters too
Of many our contriving friends in Rome
Petition us at home. Sextus Pompeius
Hath given the dare to Caesar and commands
The empire of the sea. Our slippery people,
Whose love is never linked to the deserver
Till his deserts are past, begin to throw
Pompey the Great and all his dignities
Upon his son, who--high in name and power,
Higher than both in blood and life--stands up
For the main soldier; whose quality, going on,
The sides o' th' world may danger. Much is
Which, like the courser's hair, hath yet but life
And not a serpent's poison. Say our pleasure,
To such whose place is under us, requires
Our quick remove from hence.
Where is he?
See where he is, who's with him, what he does.
Say I am dancing; if in mirth, report
That I am sudden sick. Quick, and return.
Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly,
You do not hold the method to enforce
The like from him.
In each thing give him way; cross him in nothing.
Thou teachest like a fool: the way to lose him.
Tempt him not so too far. I wish, forbear.
In time we hate that which we often fear.
But here comes Antony.
Help me away, dear Charmian! I shall fall.
It cannot be thus long; the sides of nature
Will not sustain it.
Pray you stand farther from me.
What, says the married woman you may go?
Would she had never given you leave to come.
Let her not say 'tis I that keep you here.
The gods best know--
So mightily betrayed! Yet at the first
Why should I think you can be mine, and true--
Though you in swearing shake the throned gods--
Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness,
To be entangled with those mouth-made vows
Which break themselves in swearing!
Nay, pray you seek no color for your going,
But bid farewell and go. When you sued staying,
Then was the time for words. No going then!
Eternity was in our lips and eyes,
Bliss in our brows' bent; none our parts so poor
But was a race of heaven. They are so still,
Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world,
Art turned the greatest liar.
There were a heart in Egypt.
The strong necessity of time commands
Our services awhile, but my full heart
Remains in use with you. Our Italy
Shines o'er with civil swords; Sextus Pompeius
Makes his approaches to the port of Rome;
Equality of two domestic powers
Breed scrupulous faction; the hated grown to
Are newly grown to love; the condemned Pompey,
Rich in his father's honor, creeps apace
Into the hearts of such as have not thrived
Upon the present state, whose numbers threaten;
And quietness, grown sick of rest, would purge
By any desperate change. My more particular,
And that which most with you should safe my going,
Is Fulvia's death.
Though age from folly could not give me freedom,
It does from childishness. Can Fulvia die?
Look here, and at thy sovereign leisure read
The garboils she awaked; at the last, best,
See when and where she died.
Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill
With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
In Fulvia's death, how mine received shall be.
Quarrel no more, but be prepared to know
The purposes I bear, which are or cease
As you shall give th' advice. By the fire
That quickens Nilus' slime, I go from hence
Thy soldier, servant, making peace or war
As thou affects.
But let it be; I am quickly ill and well;
So Antony loves.
And give true evidence to his love, which stands
An honorable trial.
Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one scene
Of excellent dissembling, and let it look
Like perfect honor.
You can do better yet, but this is meetly.
Now by my sword--
But this is not the best. Look, prithee, Charmian,
How this Herculean Roman does become
The carriage of his chafe.
Sir, you and I must part, but that's not it;
Sir, you and I have loved, but there's not it;
That you know well. Something it is I would--
And I am all forgotten.
Holds idleness your subject, I should take you
For idleness itself.
To bear such idleness so near the heart
As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me,
Since my becomings kill me when they do not
Eye well to you. Your honor calls you hence;
Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly,
And all the gods go with you. Upon your sword
Sit laurel victory, and smooth success
Be strewed before your feet.
Our separation so abides and flies
That thou, residing here, goes yet with me,
And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee.
Away!
Lepidus, and their Train.]
You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know,
It is not Caesar's natural vice to hate
Our great competitor. From Alexandria
This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes
The lamps of night in revel, is not more manlike
Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy
More womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or
Vouchsafed to think he had partners. You shall
That all men follow.
Evils enough to darken all his goodness.
His faults in him seem as the spots of heaven,
More fiery by night's blackness, hereditary
Rather than purchased, what he cannot change
Than what he chooses.
You are too indulgent. Let's grant it is not
Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy,
To give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit
And keep the turn of tippling with a slave,
To reel the streets at noon and stand the buffet
With knaves that smells of sweat. Say this becomes
As his composure must be rare indeed
Whom these things cannot blemish--yet must
Antony
No way excuse his foils when we do bear
So great weight in his lightness. If he filled
His vacancy with his voluptuousness,
Full surfeits and the dryness of his bones
Call on him for 't. But to confound such time
That drums him from his sport and speaks as loud
As his own state and ours, 'tis to be chid
As we rate boys who, being mature in knowledge,
Pawn their experience to their present pleasure
And so rebel to judgment.
Thy biddings have been done, and every hour,
Most noble Caesar, shalt thou have report
How 'tis abroad. Pompey is strong at sea,
And it appears he is beloved of those
That only have feared Caesar. To the ports
The discontents repair, and men's reports
Give him much wronged.
It hath been taught us from the primal state
That he which is was wished until he were,
And the ebbed man, ne'er loved till ne'er worth love,
Comes feared by being lacked. This common body,
Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream,
Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide
To rot itself with motion.
Menecrates and Menas, famous pirates,
Makes the sea serve them, which they ear and
With keels of every kind. Many hot inroads
They make in Italy--the borders maritime
Lack blood to think on 't--and flush youth revolt.
No vessel can peep forth but 'tis as soon
Taken as seen, for Pompey's name strikes more
Than could his war resisted.
Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once
Was beaten from Modena, where thou slew'st
Hirsius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel
Did famine follow, whom thou fought'st against,
Though daintily brought up, with patience more
Than savages could suffer. Thou didst drink
The stale of horses and the gilded puddle
Which beasts would cough at. Thy palate then did
The roughest berry on the rudest hedge.
Yea, like the stag when snow the pasture sheets,
The barks of trees thou browsed. On the Alps
It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh
Which some did die to look on. And all this--
It wounds thine honor that I speak it now--
Was borne so like a soldier that thy cheek
So much as lanked not.
Drive him to Rome. 'Tis time we twain
Did show ourselves i' th' field, and to that end
Assemble we immediate council. Pompey
Thrives in our idleness.
Both what by sea and land I can be able
To front this present time.
It is my business too. Farewell.
Farewell, my lord. What you shall know meantime
Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir,
To let me be partaker.
Doubt not, sir. I knew it for my bond.
That I might sleep out this great gap of time
My Antony is away.
Thou, eunuch Mardian!
Not now to hear thee sing. I take no pleasure
In aught an eunuch has. 'Tis well for thee
That, being unseminared, thy freer thoughts
May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?
Not in deed, madam, for I can do nothing
But what indeed is honest to be done.
Yet have I fierce affections, and think
What Venus did with Mars.
Where think'st thou he is now? Stands he, or sits he?
Or does he walk? Or is he on his horse?
Do bravely, horse, for wot'st thou whom thou
The demi-Atlas of this Earth, the arm
And burgonet of men. He's speaking now,
Or murmuring "Where's my serpent of old Nile?"
For so he calls me. Now I feed myself
With most delicious poison. Think on me
That am with Phoebus' amorous pinches black,
And wrinkled deep in time? Broad-fronted Caesar,
When thou wast here above the ground, I was
Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow;
There would he anchor his aspect, and die
With looking on his life.
How much unlike art thou Mark Antony!
Yet coming from him, that great med'cine hath
With his tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my brave Mark Antony?
He kissed--the last of many doubled kisses--
This orient pearl. His speech sticks in my heart.
Mine ear must pluck it thence.
This treasure of an oyster; at whose foot,
To mend the petty present, I will piece
Her opulent throne with kingdoms. All the East,
Say thou, shall call her mistress." So he nodded
And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed,
Who neighed so high that what I would have spoke
Was beastly dumbed by him.
Like to the time o' th' year between th' extremes
Of hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry.
Note him, good Charmian, 'tis the man! But note
He was not sad, for he would shine on those
That make their looks by his; he was not merry,
Which seemed to tell them his remembrance lay
In Egypt with his joy; but between both.
The violence of either thee becomes,
So does it no man's else.--Met'st thou my posts?
Ay, madam, twenty several messengers.
Why do you send so thick?
When I forget to send to Antony
Shall die a beggar.--Ink and paper, Charmian.--
Welcome, my good Alexas.--Did I, Charmian,
Ever love Caesar so?
Be choked with such another emphasis!
Say "the brave Antony."
By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth
If thou with Caesar paragon again
My man of men.
When I was green in judgment, cold in blood,
To say as I said then. But come, away,
Get me ink and paper.
He shall have every day a several greeting,
Or I'll unpeople Egypt.
If the great gods be just, they shall assist
The deeds of justest men.
That what they do delay they not deny.
Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
The thing we sue for.
Beg often our own harms, which the wise powers
Deny us for our good; so find we profit
By losing of our prayers.
The people love me, and the sea is mine;
My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope
Says it will come to th' full. Mark Antony
In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
No wars without doors. Caesar gets money where
He loses hearts. Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flattered; but he neither loves,
Nor either cares for him.
Are in the field. A mighty strength they carry.
Where have you this? 'Tis false.
He dreams. I know they are in Rome together,
Looking for Antony. But all the charms of love,
Salt Cleopatra, soften thy wanned lip!
Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both;
Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts;
Keep his brain fuming. Epicurean cooks
Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite,
That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honor
Even till a Lethe'd dullness--
How now, Varrius?
This is most certain that I shall deliver:
Mark Antony is every hour in Rome
Expected. Since he went from Egypt 'tis
This amorous surfeiter would have donned his helm
For such a petty war. His soldiership
Is twice the other twain. But let us rear
The higher our opinion, that our stirring
Can from the lap of Egypt's widow pluck
The ne'er lust-wearied Antony.
Caesar and Antony shall well greet together.
His wife that's dead did trespasses to Caesar;
His brother warred upon him, although I think
Not moved by Antony.
How lesser enmities may give way to greater.
Were 't not that we stand up against them all,
For they have entertained cause enough
To draw their swords. But how the fear of us
May cement their divisions and bind up
The petty difference, we yet not know.
Be 't as our gods will have 't. It only stands
Our lives upon to use our strongest hands.
Come, Menas.
Good Enobarbus, 'tis a worthy deed,
And shall become you well, to entreat your captain
To soft and gentle speech.
To answer like himself. If Caesar move him,
Let Antony look over Caesar's head
And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter,
Were I the wearer of Antonio's beard,
But small to greater matters must give way.
Your speech is passion; but pray you stir
No embers up. Here comes the noble Antony.
Maecenas, and Agrippa.]
If we compose well here, to Parthia.
Hark, Ventidius.	
That which combined us was most great, and let not
May it be gently heard. When we debate
Our trivial difference loud, we do commit
Murder in healing wounds. Then, noble partners,
The rather for I earnestly beseech,
Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,
Nor curstness grow to th' matter.
Were we before our armies, and to fight,
Or, being, concern you not.
If or for nothing or a little, I
Should say myself offended, and with you
Chiefly i' th' world; more laughed at, that I should
Once name you derogately when to sound your
It not concerned me.
My being in Egypt, Caesar, what was 't to you?
No more than my residing here at Rome
Might be to you in Egypt. Yet if you there
Did practice on my state, your being in Egypt
Might be my question.
You may be pleased to catch at mine intent
By what did here befall me. Your wife and brother
Made wars upon me, and their contestation
Was theme for you; you were the word of war.
You do mistake your business. My brother never
Did urge me in his act. I did inquire it,
And have my learning from some true reports
That drew their swords with you. Did he not rather
Discredit my authority with yours,
And make the wars alike against my stomach,
Having alike your cause? Of this my letters
Before did satisfy you. If you'll patch a quarrel,
As matter whole you have to make it with,
It must not be with this.
By laying defects of judgment to me; but
You patched up your excuses.
Very necessity of this thought, that I,
Your partner in the cause 'gainst which he fought,
Could not with graceful eyes attend those wars
Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife,
The third o' th' world is yours, which with a snaffle
You may pace easy, but not such a wife.
So much uncurbable, her garboils, Caesar,
Made out of her impatience--which not wanted
Shrewdness of policy too--I grieving grant
Did you too much disquiet. For that you must
But say I could not help it.
When rioting in Alexandria; you
Did pocket up my letters, and with taunts
Did gibe my missive out of audience.
He fell upon me ere admitted, then;
Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want
Of what I was i' th' morning. But next day
As to have asked him pardon. Let this fellow
Be nothing of our strife; if we contend,
Out of our question wipe him.
The article of your oath, which you shall never
Have tongue to charge me with.
The honor is sacred which he talks on now,
Supposing that I lacked it.--But on, Caesar:
The article of my oath?
To lend me arms and aid when I required them,
The which you both denied.
And then when poisoned hours had bound me up
From mine own knowledge. As nearly as I may
Shall not make poor my greatness, nor my power
Work without it. Truth is that Fulvia,
To have me out of Egypt, made wars here,
For which myself, the ignorant motive, do
So far ask pardon as befits mine honor
To stoop in such a case.
If it might please you to enforce no further
The griefs between you, to forget them quite
Were to remember that the present need
Speaks to atone you.
Thou art a soldier only. Speak no more.
You wrong this presence; therefore speak no more.
The manner of his speech; for 't cannot be
We shall remain in friendship, our conditions
So diff'ring in their acts. Yet if I knew
What hoop should hold us staunch, from edge to
Thou hast a sister by the mother's side,
Admired Octavia. Great Mark Antony
Is now a widower.
If Cleopatra heard you, your reproof
Were well deserved of rashness.
Agrippa further speak.
To hold you in perpetual amity,
To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts
With an unslipping knot, take Antony
Octavia to his wife, whose beauty claims
No worse a husband than the best of men;
Whose virtue and whose general graces speak
That which none else can utter. By this marriage
All little jealousies, which now seem great,
And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
Would then be nothing. Truths would be tales,
Where now half-tales be truths. Her love to both
Would each to other and all loves to both
Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke,
For 'tis a studied, not a present thought,
By duty ruminated.
Not till he hears how Antony is touched
With what is spoke already.
If I would say "Agrippa, be it so,"
To make this good?
His power unto Octavia.
To this good purpose, that so fairly shows,
Dream of impediment. Let me have thy hand.
Further this act of grace; and from this hour
The heart of brothers govern in our loves
And sway our great designs.
Did ever love so dearly. Let her live
To join our kingdoms and our hearts; and never
Fly off our loves again.
For he hath laid strange courtesies and great
Of late upon me. I must thank him only,
Lest my remembrance suffer ill report;
At heel of that, defy him.
Of us must Pompey presently be sought,
Or else he seeks out us.
But by sea he is an absolute master.
Would we had spoke together. Haste we for it.
Yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we
The business we have talked of.
And do invite you to my sister's view,
Whither straight I'll lead you.
Let us, Lepidus, not lack your company.
Noble Antony, not sickness should detain me.
Maecenas exit.]
Maecenas!--My honorable friend Agrippa!
The barge she sat in like a burnished throne
Burned on the water. The poop was beaten gold,
Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
The winds were lovesick with them. The oars were
Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
The water which they beat to follow faster,
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
It beggared all description: she did lie
In her pavilion--cloth-of-gold, of tissue--
The fancy outwork nature. On each side her
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
With divers-colored fans, whose wind did seem
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
And what they undid did.
Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
So many mermaids, tended her i' th' eyes,
And made their bends adornings. At the helm
Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands
That yarely frame the office. From the barge
Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
Her people out upon her; and Antony,
Enthroned i' th' market-place, did sit alone,
Whistling to th' air, which but for vacancy
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too
And made a gap in nature.
Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,
Invited her to supper. She replied
It should be better he became her guest,
Which she entreated. Our courteous Antony,
Whom ne'er the word of "No" woman heard speak,
Being barbered ten times o'er, goes to the feast,
And for his ordinary pays his heart
For what his eyes eat only.
She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed;
He ploughed her, and she cropped.
Hop forty paces through the public street,
And having lost her breath, she spoke and panted,
That she did make defect perfection,
And breathless pour breath forth.
Now Antony must leave her utterly.
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety. Other women cloy
The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry
Where most she satisfies. For vilest things
Become themselves in her, that the holy priests
Bless her when she is riggish.
If beauty, wisdom, modesty can settle
The heart of Antony, Octavia is
Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guest
Whilst you abide here.
The world and my great office will sometimes
Divide me from your bosom.
Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers
To them for you.
Read not my blemishes in the world's report.
Shall all be done by th' rule. Good night, dear
Good night, sir.
Now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in Egypt?
Say to me, whose fortunes shall rise higher,
Caesar's or mine?
Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side.
Thy daemon--that thy spirit which keeps thee--is
Noble, courageous, high, unmatchable,
Where Caesar's is not. But near him, thy angel
Becomes afeard, as being o'erpowered. Therefore
Make space enough between you.
To none but thee; no more but when to thee.
If thou dost play with him at any game,
Thou art sure to lose; and of that natural luck
He beats thee 'gainst the odds. Thy luster thickens
When he shines by. I say again, thy spirit
Is all afraid to govern thee near him;
But he away, 'tis noble.
Say to Ventidius I would speak with him.
He shall to Parthia. Be it art or hap,
He hath spoken true. The very dice obey him,
And in our sports my better cunning faints
Under his chance. If we draw lots, he speeds;
His cocks do win the battle still of mine
When it is all to naught, and his quails ever
Beat mine, inhooped, at odds. I will to Egypt.
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
You must to Parthia; your commission's ready.
Follow me and receive 't.
Trouble yourselves no further. Pray you hasten
Your generals after.
Will e'en but kiss Octavia, and we'll follow.
Till I shall see you in your soldiers' dress,
Which will become you both, farewell.
As I conceive the journey, be at the Mount
Before you, Lepidus.
My purposes do draw me much about.
You'll win two days upon me.
Give me some music--music, moody food
Of us that trade in love.
Let it alone. Let's to billiards. Come, Charmian.
My arm is sore. Best play with Mardian.
As well a woman with an eunuch played
As with a woman.--Come, you'll play with me, sir?
And when good will is showed, though 't come too
The actor may plead pardon. I'll none now.
Give me mine angle; we'll to th' river. There,
My music playing far off, I will betray
Tawny-finned fishes. My bended hook shall pierce
Their slimy jaws, and as I draw them up
And say "Aha! You're caught."
You wagered on your angling; when your diver
Did hang a salt fish on his hook, which he
With fervency drew up.
Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed,
Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
That long time have been barren.
Antonio's dead! If thou say so, villain,
Thou kill'st thy mistress. But well and free,
If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here
My bluest veins to kiss, a hand that kings
Have lipped and trembled kissing.
Why, there's more gold. But sirrah, mark, we use
To say the dead are well. Bring it to that,
The gold I give thee will I melt and pour
Down thy ill-uttering throat.
But there's no goodness in thy face--if Antony
Be free and healthful, so tart a favor
To trumpet such good tidings! If not well,
Thou shouldst come like a Fury crowned with snakes,
Not like a formal man.
Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well,
Or friends with Caesar or not captive to him,
Rich pearls upon thee.
And friends with Caesar.
Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.
Make thee a fortune from me.
The good precedence. Fie upon "But yet."
Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend,
Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,
The good and bad together: he's friends with Caesar,
In state of health, thou say'st, and, thou say'st, free.
Free, madam, no. I made no such report.
He's bound unto Octavia.
For the best turn i' th' bed.
Madam, he's married to Octavia.
The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
Hence, horrible villain, or I'll spurn thine eyes
Like balls before me! I'll unhair thy head!
Thou shalt be whipped with wire and stewed in
Smarting in ling'ring pickle.
Say 'tis not so, a province I will give thee
And make thy fortunes proud. The blow thou hadst
Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage,
And I will boot thee with what gift beside
Thy modesty can beg.
Rogue, thou hast lived too long.	
What mean you, madam? I have made no fault.
Good madam, keep yourself within yourself.
The man is innocent.
Some innocents 'scape not the thunderbolt.
Melt Egypt into Nile, and kindly creatures
Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again.
Though I am mad, I will not bite him. Call!
He is afeard to come.
These hands do lack nobility that they strike
Have given myself the cause.
Come hither, sir.
Though it be honest, it is never good
To bring bad news. Give to a gracious message
An host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell
Themselves when they be felt.
If thou again say "yes."
The gods confound thee! Dost thou hold there still?
Should I lie, madam?
So half my Egypt were submerged and made
Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me
Thou wouldst appear most ugly. He is married?
Take no offense that I would not offend you.
To punish me for what you make me do
Seems much unequal. He's married to Octavia.
That art not what th' art sure of! Get thee hence.
The merchandise which thou hast brought from
Rome
Are all too dear for me. Lie they upon thy hand,
And be undone by 'em!	
In praising Antony, I have dispraised Caesar.
Go to the fellow, good Alexas. Bid him
Report the feature of Octavia, her years,
Her inclination; let him not leave out
The color of her hair. Bring me word quickly.
Let him forever go--let him not, Charmian.
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
The other way 's a Mars.  Bid you
Alexas
Bring me word how tall she is.--Pity me,
Charmian,
But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber.
Antony, Enobarbus, Maecenas, and Agrippa,
Your hostages I have, so have you mine,
And we shall talk before we fight.
That first we come to words, and therefore have we
Our written purposes before us sent,
Which if thou hast considered, let us know
If 'twill tie up thy discontented sword
And carry back to Sicily much tall youth
That else must perish here.
The senators alone of this great world,
Chief factors for the gods: I do not know
Wherefore my father should revengers want,
Having a son and friends, since Julius Caesar,
Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted,
There saw you laboring for him. What was 't
That moved pale Cassius to conspire? And what
Made the all-honored, honest, Roman Brutus,
With the armed rest, courtiers of beauteous
To drench the Capitol, but that they would
Have one man but a man? And that is it
Hath made me rig my navy, at whose burden
The angered ocean foams, with which I meant
To scourge th' ingratitude that despiteful Rome
Cast on my noble father.
Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails.
We'll speak with thee at sea. At land thou know'st
How much we do o'ercount thee.
Thou dost o'ercount me of my father's house;
But since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
Remain in 't as thou mayst.
For this is from the present--how you take
The offers we have sent you.
Which do not be entreated to, but weigh
What it is worth embraced.
To try a larger fortune.
Of Sicily, Sardinia; and I must
Rid all the sea of pirates; then to send
Measures of wheat to Rome. This 'greed upon,
To part with unhacked edges and bear back
Our targes undinted.
To take this offer. But Mark Antony
Put me to some impatience.--Though I lose
The praise of it by telling, you must know
When Caesar and your brother were at blows,
Your mother came to Sicily and did find
Her welcome friendly.
And am well studied for a liberal thanks,
Which I do owe you.
The beds i' th' East are soft; and thanks to you,
That called me timelier than my purpose hither,
For I have gained by 't.
There's a change upon you.
What counts harsh Fortune casts upon my face,
But in my bosom shall she never come
To make my heart her vassal.
And sealed between us.
We'll feast each other ere we part, and let's
Draw lots who shall begin.
No, Antony, take the lot. But, first or last,
Your fine Egyptian cookery shall have
The fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar
Grew fat with feasting there.
And I have heard Apollodorus carried--
No more of that. He did so.
And well am like to do, for I perceive
Four feasts are toward.
When I have envied thy behavior.
When you have well deserved ten times as much
As I have said you did.
It nothing ill becomes thee.--
Aboard my galley I invite you all.
Will you lead, lords?
Antonius.
Mark Antony. He will to his Egyptian dish again.
Then shall the sighs of Octavia blow the fire up in
Caesar, and, as I said before, that which is the
Lepidus, Agrippa, Maecenas, Enobarbus, Menas, with
Thus do they, sir: they take the flow o' th' Nile
By certain scales i' th' Pyramid; they know
By th' height, the lowness, or the mean if dearth
Or foison follow. The higher Nilus swells,
The more it promises. As it ebbs, the seedsman
Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain,
And shortly comes to harvest.
Sit, and some wine. A health to Lepidus!
Pompey, a word.
Forsake thy seat, I do beseech thee, captain,
And hear me speak a word.
Forbear me till anon.--This wine for Lepidus!
Go hang, sir, hang! Tell me of that? Away!
Do as I bid you.--Where's this cup I called for?
If for the sake of merit thou wilt hear me,
Rise from thy stool.
The matter?
Thou hast served me with much faith. What's else
Be jolly, lords.
Keep off them, for you sink.
Wilt thou be lord of all the world?
Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That's twice.
And though thou think me poor, I am the man
Will give thee all the world.
No, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup.
Thou art, if thou dar'st be, the earthly Jove.
Whate'er the ocean pales or sky inclips
Is thine, if thou wilt ha 't.
These three world-sharers, these competitors,
Are in thy vessel. Let me cut the cable,
And when we are put off, fall to their throats.
All there is thine.
And not have spoke on 't! In me 'tis villainy;
In thee 't had been good service. Thou must know
Mine honor, it. Repent that e'er thy tongue
Hath so betrayed thine act. Being done unknown,
But must condemn it now. Desist and drink.
Who seeks and will not take when once 'tis offered
Shall never find it more.
Bear him ashore.--I'll pledge it for him, Pompey.
Here's to thee, Menas.
There's a strong fellow, Menas.
The third part of the world, man. Seest not?
The third part, then, is drunk. Would it were all,
That it might go on wheels.
This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.
It ripens towards it. Strike the vessels, ho!
Here's to Caesar.
It's monstrous labor when I wash my brain
And it grows fouler.
But I had rather fast from all, four days,
Than drink so much in one.
Shall we dance now the Egyptian bacchanals
And celebrate our drink?
Till that the conquering wine hath steeped our
In soft and delicate Lethe.
Make battery to our ears with the loud music,
The while I'll place you; then the boy shall sing.
The holding every man shall beat as loud
As his strong sides can volley.
The Song.
What would you more?--Pompey, goodnight.--
Good brother,
Let me request you off. Our graver business
Frowns at this levity.--Gentle lords, let's part.
You see we have burnt our cheeks. Strong Enobarb
Is weaker than the wine, and mine own tongue
Splits what it speaks. The wild disguise hath almost
Anticked us all. What needs more words?
Goodnight.
Good Antony, your hand.
But what? We are friends! Come down into the boat.
Take heed you fall not.
Menas, I'll not on shore.
No, to my cabin. These drums, these trumpets,
Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell
To these great fellows. Sound and be hanged. Sound
Pacorus borne before him; with Silius and Soldiers.]
Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck, and now
Pleased Fortune does of Marcus Crassus' death
Make me revenger. Bear the King's son's body
Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes,
Pays this for Marcus Crassus.
Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm,
The fugitive Parthians follow. Spur through Media,
Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither
The routed fly. So thy grand captain, Antony,
Shall set thee on triumphant chariots and
Put garlands on thy head.
May make too great an act. For learn this, Silius:
Better to leave undone than by our deed
Acquire too high a fame when him we serve 's away.
Caesar and Antony have ever won
More in their officer than person. Sossius,
One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant,
For quick accumulation of renown,
Which he achieved by th' minute, lost his favor.
Who does i' th' wars more than his captain can
Becomes his captain's captain; and ambition,
The soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss
Than gain which darkens him.
But 'twould offend him. And in his offense
Should my performance perish.
Without the which a soldier and his sword
Grants scarce distinction. Thou wilt write to
Antony?
That magical word of war, we have effected;
How, with his banners and his well-paid ranks,
The ne'er-yet-beaten horse of Parthia
We have jaded out o' th' field.
He purposeth to Athens, whither, with what haste
The weight we must convey with 's will permit,
We shall appear before him.--On there, pass along!
They have dispatched with Pompey; he is gone.
The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps
To part from Rome. Caesar is sad, and Lepidus,
Since Pompey's feast, as Menas says, is troubled
With the greensickness.
Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!
Caesar? Why, he's the Jupiter of men.
What's Antony? The god of Jupiter.
Spake you of Caesar? How, the nonpareil!
Would you praise Caesar, say "Caesar." Go no
Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.
But he loves Caesar best, yet he loves Antony.
Hoo, hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets,
Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number--hoo!--
His love to Antony. But as for Caesar,
Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.
They are his shards and he their beetle.
So,
This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.
Good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.
You take from me a great part of myself.
Use me well in 't.--Sister, prove such a wife
As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest bond
Shall pass on thy approof.--Most noble Antony,
Let not the piece of virtue which is set
Betwixt us, as the cement of our love
To keep it builded, be the ram to batter
The fortress of it. For better might we
Have loved without this mean, if on both parts
This be not cherished.
In your distrust.
Though you be therein curious, the least cause
For what you seem to fear. So the gods keep you,
And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends.
We will here part.
Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well.
The elements be kind to thee and make
Thy spirits all of comfort. Fare thee well.
The April's in her eyes. It is love's spring,
And these the showers to bring it on.--Be cheerful.
Sir, look well to my husband's house, and--
What, Octavia?
Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
Her heart inform her tongue--the swan's-down
That stands upon the swell at the full of tide
And neither way inclines.
He were the worse for that were he a horse;
So is he being a man.
When Antony found Julius Caesar dead,
He cried almost to roaring. And he wept
When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.
That year indeed he was troubled with a rheum.
What willingly he did confound he wailed,
Believe 't, till I wept too.
You shall hear from me still. The time shall not
Outgo my thinking on you.
Look, here I have you, thus I let you go,
And give you to the gods.
Let all the number of the stars give light
To thy fair way.
Where is the fellow?
Go to, go to.--Come hither, sir.
Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you
But when you are well pleased.
Through whom I might command it?--Come thou
Most gracious Majesty!
Ay, dread queen.
Between her brother and Mark Antony.
Is she as tall as me?
Didst hear her speak? Is she shrill-tongued or low?
Madam, I heard her speak. She is low-voiced.
That's not so good. He cannot like her long.
Like her? O Isis, 'tis impossible!
What majesty is in her gait? Remember,
If e'er thou looked'st on majesty.
Her motion and her station are as one.
She shows a body rather than a life,
Or I have no observance.
Cannot make better note.
The fellow has good judgment.
Bear'st thou her face in mind? Is 't long or round?
For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.
Her hair what color?
As low as she would wish it.
Thou must not take my former sharpness ill.
Most fit for business. Go, make thee ready.
Our letters are prepared.	
Indeed he is so. I repent me much
That so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him,
This creature's no such thing.
The man hath seen some majesty, and should know.
Hath he seen majesty? Isis else defend,
And serving you so long!
Charmian,
But 'tis no matter. Thou shalt bring him to me
Where I will write. All may be well enough.
Nay, nay, Octavia, not only that--
That were excusable, that and thousands more
Of semblable import--but he hath waged
New wars 'gainst Pompey; made his will and read it
To public ear;
Spoke scantly of me; when perforce he could not
But pay me terms of honor, cold and sickly
He vented them, most narrow measure lent me;
When the best hint was given him, he not took 't,
Or did it from his teeth.
Believe not all, or if you must believe,
Stomach not all. A more unhappy lady,
If this division chance, ne'er stood between,
Praying for both parts.
The good gods will mock me presently
When I shall pray "O, bless my lord and husband!"
Undo that prayer by crying out as loud
Prays and destroys the prayer; no midway
Let your best love draw to that point which seeks
Best to preserve it. If I lose mine honor,
Than yours so branchless. But, as you requested,
Yourself shall go between 's. The meantime, lady,
Shall stain your brother. Make your soonest haste,
So your desires are yours.
The Jove of power make me, most weak, most weak,
Your reconciler. Wars 'twixt you twain would be
As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
Should solder up the rift.
When it appears to you where this begins,
Turn your displeasure that way, for our faults
Can never be so equal that your love
Can equally move with them. Provide your going;
Choose your own company, and command what cost
Your heart has mind to.
Pompey.
Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more,
And throw between them all the food thou hast,
They'll grind the one the other. Where's Antony?
He's walking in the garden, thus, and spurns
The rush that lies before him; cries "Fool Lepidus!"
And threats the throat of that his officer
That murdered Pompey.
For Italy and Caesar. More, Domitius:
My lord desires you presently. My news
But let it be. Bring me to Antony.
Contemning Rome, he has done all this and more
In Alexandria. Here's the manner of 't:
Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold
Were publicly enthroned. At the feet sat
Caesarion, whom they call my father's son,
And all the unlawful issue that their lust
Since then hath made between them. Unto her
He gave the stablishment of Egypt, made her
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia,
Absolute queen.
His sons he there proclaimed the kings of kings.
Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia
He gave to Alexander; to Ptolemy he assigned
Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia. She
In th' habiliments of the goddess Isis
That day appeared, and oft before gave audience,
As 'tis reported, so.
Who, queasy with his insolence already,
Will their good thoughts call from him.
The people knows it and have now received
His accusations.
Caesar, and that, having in Sicily
Sextus Pompeius spoiled, we had not rated him
His part o' th' isle. Then does he say he lent me
Some shipping, unrestored. Lastly, he frets
That Lepidus of the triumvirate
Should be deposed and, being, that we detain
All his revenue.
That he his high authority abused
And did deserve his change. For what I have
And other of his conquered kingdoms I
Demand the like.
Nor must not then be yielded to in this.
Hail, Caesar, and my lord! Hail, most dear Caesar.
That ever I should call thee castaway!
You have not called me so, nor have you cause.
Why have you stol'n upon us thus? You come not
Like Caesar's sister. The wife of Antony
Should have an army for an usher and
The neighs of horse to tell of her approach
Long ere she did appear. The trees by th' way
Should have borne men, and expectation fainted,
Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust
Should have ascended to the roof of heaven,
Raised by your populous troops. But you are come
The ostentation of our love, which, left unshown,
Is often left unloved. We should have met you
By sea and land, supplying every stage
With an augmented greeting.
To come thus was I not constrained, but did it
On my free will. My lord, Mark Antony,
Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted
My grieved ear withal, whereon I begged
His pardon for return.
Being an abstract 'tween his lust and him.
Do not say so, my lord.
And his affairs come to me on the wind.
Where is he now?
No, my most wronged sister. Cleopatra
Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire
Up to a whore, who now are levying
The kings o' th' Earth for war. He hath assembled
Bocchus, the King of Libya; Archelaus
Of Cappadocia; Philadelphos, King
Of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas;
King Manchus of Arabia; King of Pont;
Herod of Jewry; Mithridates, King
Of Comagen; Polemon and Amyntas,
The Kings of Mede and Lycaonia,
With a more larger list of scepters.
That have my heart parted betwixt two friends
That does afflict each other!
Your letters did withhold our breaking forth
Till we perceived both how you were wrong led
And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart.
Be you not troubled with the time, which drives
But let determined things to destiny
Hold unbewailed their way. Welcome to Rome,
Nothing more dear to me. You are abused
Beyond the mark of thought, and the high gods,
To do you justice, makes his ministers
Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort,
And ever welcome to us.
Each heart in Rome does love and pity you;
Only th' adulterous Antony, most large
In his abominations, turns you off
And gives his potent regiment to a trull
That noises it against us.
Most certain. Sister, welcome. Pray you
Be ever known to patience. My dear'st sister!
Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars
And say'st it is not fit.
Is 't not denounced against us? Why should not we
Be there in person?
If we should serve with horse and mares together,
The horse were merely lost. The mares would bear
Your presence needs must puzzle Antony,
Take from his heart, take from his brain, from 's time
What should not then be spared. He is already
Traduced for levity, and 'tis said in Rome
That Photinus, an eunuch, and your maids
Manage this war.
That speak against us! A charge we bear i' th' war,
And as the president of my kingdom will
Appear there for a man. Speak not against it.
Here comes the Emperor.
That from Tarentum and Brundusium
He could so quickly cut the Ionian Sea
And take in Toryne?--You have heard on 't, sweet?
Celerity is never more admired
Than by the negligent.
Which might have well becomed the best of men,
To taunt at slackness.--Canidius, we will fight
With him by sea.
My lord do so?
So hath my lord dared him to single fight.
Ay, and to wage this battle at Pharsalia,
Where Caesar fought with Pompey. But these offers,
Which serve not for his vantage, he shakes off,
And so should you.
Your mariners are muleteers, reapers, people
Engrossed by swift impress. In Caesar's fleet
Are those that often have 'gainst Pompey fought.
Their ships are yare, yours heavy. No disgrace
Shall fall you for refusing him at sea,
Being prepared for land.
Most worthy sir, you therein throw away
The absolute soldiership you have by land,
Distract your army, which doth most consist
Of war-marked footmen, leave unexecuted
Your own renowned knowledge, quite forgo
The way which promises assurance, and
Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard
From firm security.
Our overplus of shipping will we burn,
And with the rest full-manned, from th' head of
Actium
Beat th' approaching Caesar. But if we fail,
We then can do 't at land.
Thy business?
The news is true, my lord; he is descried.
Caesar has taken Toryne.	
Can he be there in person? 'Tis impossible;
Strange that his power should be. Canidius,
Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land,
And our twelve thousand horse. We'll to our ship.--
Away, my Thetis.
How now, worthy soldier?
Trust not to rotten planks. Do you misdoubt
This sword and these my wounds? Let th' Egyptians
And the Phoenicians go a-ducking. We
Have used to conquer standing on the earth
And fighting foot to foot.
By Hercules, I think I am i' th' right.
Soldier, thou art, but his whole action grows
Not in the power on 't. So our leader's led,
And we are women's men.
The legions and the horse whole, do you not?
Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius,
Publicola, and Caelius are for sea,
But we keep whole by land. This speed of Caesar's
Carries beyond belief.
His power went out in such distractions as
Beguiled all spies.
They say one Taurus.
With news the time's in labor, and throws forth
Each minute some.
Strike not by land, keep whole. Provoke not battle
Till we have done at sea. Do not exceed
The prescript of this scroll.	
Our fortune lies
Upon this jump.
Set we our squadrons on yond side o' th' hill
In eye of Caesar's battle, from which place
We may the number of the ships behold
And so proceed accordingly.
Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer.
Th' Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,
With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder.
To see 't mine eyes are blasted.
All the whole synod of them!
The greater cantle of the world is lost
With very ignorance. We have kissed away
Kingdoms and provinces.
On our side, like the tokened pestilence,
Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt,
Whom leprosy o'ertake, i' th' midst o' th' fight,
When vantage like a pair of twins appeared
Both as the same--or, rather, ours the elder--
The breeze upon her like a cow in June,
Hoists sails and flies.
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not
Endure a further view.
The noble ruin of her magic, Antony,
Claps on his sea-wing and, like a doting mallard,
Leaving the fight in height, flies after her.
Experience, manhood, honor ne'er before
Did violate so itself.
Our fortune on the sea is out of breath
And sinks most lamentably. Had our general
Been what he knew himself, it had gone well.
Most grossly by his own.
Ay, are you thereabouts? Why then goodnight
What further comes.	
My legions and my horse. Six kings already
Show me the way of yielding.	
The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason
Sits in the wind against me.
Hark, the land bids me tread no more upon 't.
It is ashamed to bear me. Friends, come hither.
Have lost my way forever. I have a ship
Laden with gold. Take that, divide it. Fly,
And make your peace with Caesar.
To run and show their shoulders. Friends, begone.
Which has no need of you. Begone.
My treasure's in the harbor; take it. O,
My very hairs do mutiny, for the white
Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them
For fear and doting. Friends, begone. You shall
Have letters from me to some friends that will
Sweep your way for you. Pray you look not sad,
Nor make replies of loathness. Take the hint
Which my despair proclaims. Let that be left
Which leaves itself. To the seaside straightway!
Leave me, I pray, a little--pray you, now,
Nay, do so--for indeed I have lost command.
Therefore I pray you--I'll see you by and by.
Nay, gentle madam, to him, comfort him.
Yes, my lord, yes. He at Philippi kept
His sword e'en like a dancer, while I struck
The lean and wrinkled Cassius, and 'twas I
That the mad Brutus ended. He alone
Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had
In the brave squares of war, yet now--no matter.
Ah, stand by.
Go to him, madam; speak to him.
He's unqualitied with very shame.
Most noble sir, arise. The Queen approaches.
Her head's declined, and death will seize her but
Your comfort makes the rescue.
How I convey my shame out of thine eyes,
By looking back what I have left behind
Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought
You would have followed.
My heart was to thy rudder tied by th' strings,
And thou shouldst tow me after. O'er my spirit
Thy full supremacy thou knew'st, and that
Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods
Command me.
To the young man send humble treaties, dodge
And palter in the shifts of lowness, who
With half the bulk o' th' world played as I pleased,
Making and marring fortunes. You did know
How much you were my conqueror, and that
My sword, made weak by my affection, would
Obey it on all cause.
Fall not a tear, I say; one of them rates
All that is won and lost. Give me a kiss.	
Even this repays me.--
We sent our schoolmaster. Is he come back?--
Love, I am full of lead.--Some wine
Within there, and our viands! Fortune knows
We scorn her most when most she offers blows.
Dolabella, with others.]
Let him appear that's come from Antony.
Know you him?
An argument that he is plucked, when hither
He sends so poor a pinion of his wing,
Which had superfluous kings for messengers
Not many moons gone by.
Such as I am, I come from Antony.
As is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf
To his grand sea.
Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and
Requires to live in Egypt, which not granted,
He lessens his requests, and to thee sues
To let him breathe between the heavens and Earth,
Next, Cleopatra does confess thy greatness,
Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves
The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs,
Now hazarded to thy grace.
Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she
From Egypt drive her all-disgraced friend,
Or take his life there. This if she perform,
She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.
Fortune pursue thee!
Dispatch.
From Antony win Cleopatra. Promise,
And in our name, what she requires; add more,
From thine invention, offers. Women are not
In their best fortunes strong, but want will perjure
The ne'er-touched vestal. Try thy cunning, Thidias.
Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we
Will answer as a law.
Observe how Antony becomes his flaw,
And what thou think'st his very action speaks
In every power that moves.
What shall we do, Enobarbus?
Is Antony or we in fault for this?
Antony only, that would make his will
Lord of his reason. What though you fled
From that great face of war, whose several ranges
Frighted each other? Why should he follow?
The itch of his affection should not then
Have nicked his captainship, at such a point,
When half to half the world opposed, he being
The mered question. 'Twas a shame no less
Than was his loss, to course your flying flags
And leave his navy gazing.
The Queen shall then have courtesy, so she
Will yield us up?
To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head,
And he will fill thy wishes to the brim
With principalities.
To him again. Tell him he wears the rose
Of youth upon him, from which the world should
Something particular: his coin, ships, legions
May be a coward's, whose ministers would prevail
Under the service of a child as soon
As i' th' command of Caesar. I dare him therefore
To lay his gay caparisons apart
And answer me declined, sword against sword,
Ourselves alone. I'll write it. Follow me.
Yes, like enough, high-battled Caesar will
Unstate his happiness and be staged to th' show
Against a sworder! I see men's judgments are
Do draw the inward quality after them
To suffer all alike. That he should dream,
Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will
Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdued
His judgment too.
What, no more ceremony? See, my women,
Against the blown rose may they stop their nose
That kneeled unto the buds.--Admit him, sir.
Mine honesty and I begin to square.
The loyalty well held to fools does make
Our faith mere folly. Yet he that can endure
To follow with allegiance a fall'n lord
Does conquer him that did his master conquer,
And earns a place i' th' story.
Hear it apart.
So haply are they friends to Antony.
He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has,
Or needs not us. If Caesar please, our master
Will leap to be his friend. For us, you know
Whose he is we are, and that is Caesar's.
Thus then, thou most renowned: Caesar entreats
Not to consider in what case thou stand'st
Further than he is Caesar.
He knows that you embrace not Antony
As you did love, but as you feared him.
The scars upon your honor therefore he
Does pity as constrained blemishes,
Not as deserved.
What is most right. Mine honor was not yielded,
But conquered merely.
That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
Thy dearest quit thee.	
What you require of him? For he partly begs
To be desired to give. It much would please him
That of his fortunes you should make a staff
To lean upon. But it would warm his spirits
To hear from me you had left Antony
And put yourself under his shroud,
The universal landlord.
My name is Thidias.
Say to great Caesar this in deputation:
To lay my crown at 's feet, and there to kneel.
Tell him, from his all-obeying breath I hear
The doom of Egypt.
Wisdom and fortune combating together,
If that the former dare but what it can,
No chance may shake it. Give me grace to lay
My duty on your hand.
When he hath mused of taking kingdoms in,
Bestowed his lips on that unworthy place
As it rained kisses.
What art thou, fellow?
The bidding of the fullest man and worthiest
To have command obeyed.
Approach there!--Ah, you kite!--Now, gods and
Authority melts from me. Of late when I cried "Ho!"
Like boys unto a muss kings would start forth
And cry "Your will?" Have you no ears? I am
Antony yet.
Take hence this jack and whip him.
Than with an old one dying.
Whip him! Were 't twenty of the greatest tributaries
That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
So saucy with the hand of she here--what's her
Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him, fellows,
Till like a boy you see him cringe his face
And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence.
Mark Antony--
Bring him again. This jack of Caesar's shall
Bear us an errand to him.
Ha!
Have I my pillow left unpressed in Rome,
Forborne the getting of a lawful race,
And by a gem of women, to be abused
By one that looks on feeders?
But when we in our viciousness grow hard--
In our own filth drop our clear judgments, make us
Adore our errors, laugh at 's while we strut
To our confusion.
Dead Caesar's trencher; nay, you were a fragment
Of Gneius Pompey's, besides what hotter hours,
Unregistered in vulgar fame, you have
Luxuriously picked out. For I am sure,
Though you can guess what temperance should be,
You know not what it is.
To let a fellow that will take rewards
And say "God quit you!" be familiar with
My playfellow, your hand, this kingly seal
And plighter of high hearts! O, that I were
Upon the hill of Basan, to outroar
The horned herd! For I have savage cause,
And to proclaim it civilly were like
For being yare about him.
Is he whipped?
If that thy father live, let him repent
Thou wast not made his daughter; and be thou sorry
To follow Caesar in his triumph, since
Thou hast been whipped for following him.
Henceforth
The white hand of a lady fever thee;
Shake thou to look on 't. Get thee back to Caesar.
Tell him thy entertainment. Look thou say
He makes me angry with him; for he seems
Proud and disdainful, harping on what I am,
Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry,
And at this time most easy 'tis to do 't,
When my good stars that were my former guides
Have empty left their orbs and shot their fires
Into th' abysm of hell. If he mislike
My speech and what is done, tell him he has
Hipparchus, my enfranched bondman, whom
He may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture,
As he shall like to quit me. Urge it thou.
Hence with thy stripes, begone!	
Alack, our terrene moon is now eclipsed,
And it portends alone the fall of Antony.
To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes
With one that ties his points?
Coldhearted toward me?
From my cold heart let heaven engender hail
And poison it in the source, and the first stone
Drop in my neck; as it determines, so
Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite,
Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
Together with my brave Egyptians all,
By the discandying of this pelleted storm
Lie graveless till the flies and gnats of Nile
Have buried them for prey!
Caesar sits down in Alexandria, where
Hath nobly held; our severed navy too
Have knit again, and fleet, threatening most sealike.
Where hast thou been, my heart? Dost thou hear,
If from the field I shall return once more
To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood.
There's hope in 't yet.
And fight maliciously; for when mine hours
Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives
Of me for jests. But now I'll set my teeth
And send to darkness all that stop me. Come,
Let's have one other gaudy night. Call to me
All my sad captains. Fill our bowls once more.
Let's mock the midnight bell.
Is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.
Call all his noble captains to my lord.
Do so; we'll speak to them, and tonight I'll force
The wine peep through their scars.--Come on, my
There's sap in 't yet. The next time I do fight
Even with his pestilent scythe.
Now he'll outstare the lightning. To be furious
Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood
The dove will peck the estridge; and I see still
Restores his heart. When valor preys on reason,
It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek
Some way to leave him.
Caesar reading a letter.]
He calls me "boy," and chides as he had power
To beat me out of Egypt. My messenger
He hath whipped with rods, dares me to personal
Caesar to Antony. Let the old ruffian know
Laugh at his challenge.
When one so great begins to rage, he's hunted
Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now
Make boot of his distraction. Never anger
Made good guard for itself.
Know that tomorrow the last of many battles
We mean to fight. Within our files there are,
Of those that served Mark Antony but late,
Enough to fetch him in. See it done,
And feast the army; we have store to do 't,
And they have earned the waste. Poor Antony.
He will not fight with me, Domitius?
He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
He is twenty men to one.
By sea and land I'll fight. Or I will live
Or bathe my dying honor in the blood
Shall make it live again. Woo't thou fight well?
Call forth my household servants.
Let's tonight
Be bounteous at our meal.--Give me thy hand;
Thou hast been rightly honest.--So hast thou,--
Thou,--and thou,--and thou. You have served me
And kings have been your fellows.
Out of the mind.
And all of you clapped up together in
An Antony, that I might do you service
So good as you have done.
Well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight.
Scant not my cups, and make as much of me
As when mine empire was your fellow too
And suffered my command.
To make his followers weep.
May be it is the period of your duty.
Haply you shall not see me more, or if,
You'll serve another master. I look on you
As one that takes his leave. Mine honest friends,
Married to your good service, stay till death.
Tend me tonight two hours--I ask no more--
And the gods yield you for 't!
To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep,
And I, an ass, am onion-eyed. For shame,
Transform us not to women.
Now the witch take me if I meant it thus!
Grace grow where those drops fall! My hearty
You take me in too dolorous a sense,
For I spake to you for your comfort, did desire you
To burn this night with torches. Know, my hearts,
Where rather I'll expect victorious life
Than death and honor. Let's to supper, come,
And drown consideration.
Brother, goodnight. Tomorrow is the day.
It will determine one way. Fare you well.
Heard you of nothing strange about the streets?
Belike 'tis but a rumor. Goodnight to you.
Our navy thrive, I have an absolute hope
Our landmen will stand up.
Now leaves him.
Do hear what we do.
Follow the noise so far as we have quarter.
Let's see how it will give off.
Charmian, and others.]
Eros! Mine armor, Eros!
No, my chuck.--Eros, come, mine armor, Eros.
Come, good fellow, put thine iron on.
If fortune be not ours today, it is
Because we brave her. Come.
What's this for?
The armorer of my heart. False, false. This, this!
Sooth, la, I'll help. Thus it must be.
We shall thrive now.--Seest thou, my good fellow?
Go, put on thy defenses.
Is not this buckled well?
He that unbuckles this, till we do please
To daff 't for our repose, shall hear a storm.--
Thou fumblest, Eros, and my queen's a squire
More tight at this than thou. Dispatch.--O love,
That thou couldst see my wars today, and knew'st
The royal occupation, thou shouldst see
Good morrow to thee. Welcome.
Thou look'st like him that knows a warlike charge.
To business that we love we rise betime
And go to 't with delight.
Early though 't be, have on their riveted trim
And at the port expect you.	
The morn is fair. Good morrow, general.
Good morrow, general.
This morning, like the spirit of a youth
That means to be of note, begins betimes.
So, so.--Come, give me that. This way.--Well said.--
Fare thee well, dame.	
Whate'er becomes of me,
This is a soldier's kiss. Rebukable
And worthy shameful check it were to stand
On more mechanic compliment. I'll leave thee
Now like a man of steel.--You that will fight,
Follow me close. I'll bring you to 't.--Adieu.
Please you retire to your chamber?
He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might
Determine this great war in single fight,
Then Antony--but now--. Well, on.
The gods make this a happy day to Antony.
Would thou and those thy scars had once prevailed
To make me fight at land.
The kings that have revolted and the soldier
That has this morning left thee would have still
Followed thy heels.
One ever near thee. Call for Enobarbus,
He shall not hear thee, or from Caesar's camp
Say "I am none of thine."
He is with Caesar.
He has not with him.
Go, Eros, send his treasure after. Do it.
Detain no jot, I charge thee. Write to him--
Say that I wish he never find more cause
To change a master. O, my fortunes have
Corrupted honest men. Dispatch.--Enobarbus!
Enobarbus and Dolabella.]
Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight.
Our will is Antony be took alive;
Make it so known.
The time of universal peace is near.
Prove this a prosp'rous day, the three-nooked world
Shall bear the olive freely.
Is come into the field.
Plant those that have revolted in the vant
That Antony may seem to spend his fury
Upon himself.	
Alexas did revolt and went to Jewry on
Affairs of Antony, there did dissuade
Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar
And leave his master Antony. For this pains,
Caesar hath hanged him. Canidius and the rest
That fell away have entertainment but
No honorable trust. I have done ill,
Of which I do accuse myself so sorely
That I will joy no more.
Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with
His bounty overplus. The messenger
Came on my guard, and at thy tent is now
Unloading of his mules.
Out of the host. I must attend mine office
Or would have done 't myself. Your emperor
Continues still a Jove.	
And feel I am so most. O Antony,
Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid
My better service, when my turpitude
Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my
If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean
Shall outstrike thought, but thought will do 't, I feel.
Some ditch wherein to die; the foul'st best fits
My latter part of life.
Retire! We have engaged ourselves too far.
Caesar himself has work, and our oppression
Exceeds what we expected.	
Had we done so at first, we had droven them home
With clouts about their heads.
But now 'tis made an H.	
We'll beat 'em into bench-holes. I have yet
Room for six scotches more.
They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves
For a fair victory.
And snatch 'em up as we take hares, behind.
Once for thy sprightly comfort and tenfold
For thy good valor. Come thee on.
Scarus, with others.]
We have beat him to his camp. Run one before
And let the Queen know of our gests.
Tomorrow
Before the sun shall see 's, we'll spill the blood
That has today escaped. I thank you all,
For doughty-handed are you, and have fought
Not as you served the cause, but as 't had been
Each man's like mine. You have shown all Hectors.
Enter the city. Clip your wives, your friends.
Tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears
Wash the congealment from your wounds and kiss
The honored gashes whole.
To this great fairy I'll commend thy acts,
Make her thanks bless thee.--O, thou day o' th'
Chain mine armed neck. Leap thou, attire and all,
Through proof of harness to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing.
The world's great snare uncaught?
We have beat them to their beds. What, girl, though
Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet
Get goal for goal of youth. Behold this man.
Commend unto his lips thy favoring hand.--
Kiss it, my warrior.	
He hath fought today
As if a god in hate of mankind had
Destroyed in such a shape.
An armor all of gold. It was a king's.
He has deserved it, were it carbuncled
Like holy Phoebus' car. Give me thy hand.
Through Alexandria make a jolly march.
Bear our hacked targets like the men that owe
Had our great palace the capacity
To camp this host, we all would sup together
And drink carouses to the next day's fate,
Which promises royal peril.--Trumpeters,
With brazen din blast you the city's ear.
Make mingle with our rattling taborins,
That heaven and Earth may strike their sounds
Applauding our approach.
If we be not relieved within this hour,
We must return to th' court of guard. The night
Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle
By th' second hour i' th' morn.
Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon,
When men revolted shall upon record
Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent.
The poisonous damp of night dispunge upon me,
That life, a very rebel to my will,
May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart
Against the flint and hardness of my fault,
Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder
And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony,
Nobler than my revolt is infamous,
Forgive me in thine own particular,
But let the world rank me in register
Swoons rather, for so bad a prayer as his
Was never yet for sleep.
The hand of death hath raught him.	
Hark, the drums
Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him
To th' court of guard; he is of note. Our hour
Is fully out.
Their preparation is today by sea;
We please them not by land.
We'd fight there too. But this it is: our foot
Upon the hills adjoining to the city
Shall stay with us--order for sea is given;
They have put forth the haven--
Where their appointment we may best discover
And look on their endeavor.
But being charged, we will be still by land--
Which, as I take 't, we shall, for his best force
Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales,
And hold our best advantage.
Yet they are not joined. Where yond pine does stand,
Straight how 'tis like to go.	
In Cleopatra's sails their nests. The augurs
Say they know not, they cannot tell, look grimly
And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony
Is valiant and dejected, and by starts
His fretted fortunes give him hope and fear
Of what he has and has not.
This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me.
My fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder
They cast their caps up and carouse together
Like friends long lost. Triple-turned whore! 'Tis thou
Hast sold me to this novice, and my heart
Makes only wars on thee. Bid them all fly--
For when I am revenged upon my charm,
Fortune and Antony part here; even here
Do we shake hands. All come to this? The hearts
That spanieled me at heels, to whom I gave
Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets
On blossoming Caesar, and this pine is barked
That overtopped them all. Betrayed I am.
Whose eye becked forth my wars and called them
Whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end,
Like a right gypsy hath at fast and loose
Beguiled me to the very heart of loss.--
What Eros, Eros!
Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!
Why is my lord enraged against his love?
Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving
And blemish Caesar's triumph. Let him take thee
And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians!
Follow his chariot, like the greatest spot
Of all thy sex; most monster-like be shown
For poor'st diminutives, for dolts, and let
Patient Octavia plow thy visage up
With her prepared nails.	
If it be well to live. But better 'twere
Thou fell'st into my fury, for one death
Might have prevented many.--Eros, ho!--
The shirt of Nessus is upon me. Teach me,
Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage.
Let me lodge Lichas on the horns o' th' moon,
And with those hands that grasped the heaviest
Subdue my worthiest self. The witch shall die.
To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I
Under this plot. She dies for 't.--Eros, ho!
Help me, my women! O, he's more mad
Than Telamon for his shield; the boar of Thessaly
Was never so embossed.
There lock yourself and send him word you are
The soul and body rive not more in parting
Than greatness going off.
Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself.
Say that the last I spoke was "Antony,"
And word it, prithee, piteously. Hence, Mardian,
And bring me how he takes my death.--To th'
Eros, thou yet behold'st me?
Sometime we see a cloud that's dragonish,
With trees upon 't that nod unto the world
And mock our eyes with air. Thou hast seen these
They are black vesper's pageants.
That which is now a horse, even with a thought
The rack dislimns and makes it indistinct
As water is in water.
My good knave Eros, now thy captain is
Even such a body. Here I am Antony,
Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave.
Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine--
Which whilst it was mine had annexed unto 't
Packed cards with Caesar and false-played my glory
Unto an enemy's triumph.
Nay, weep not, gentle Eros. There is left us
Ourselves to end ourselves.
She has robbed me of my sword.
My mistress loved thee and her fortunes mingled
With thine entirely.
She hath betrayed me and shall die the death.
Death of one person can be paid but once,
And that she has discharged. What thou wouldst do
Is done unto thy hand. The last she spake
Was "Antony, most noble Antony."
Then in the midst a tearing groan did break
The name of Antony; it was divided
Between her heart and lips. She rendered life
Thy name so buried in her.
Unarm, Eros. The long day's task is done,
And we must sleep.--That thou depart'st hence safe
Does pay thy labor richly. Go.	
Off, pluck off!
The sevenfold shield of Ajax cannot keep
The battery from my heart. O, cleave, my sides!
Heart, once be stronger than thy continent;
Crack thy frail case. Apace, Eros, apace!
No more a soldier. Bruised pieces, go.
You have been nobly borne.--From me awhile.
Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now
All length is torture. Since the torch is out,
Lie down and stray no farther. Now all labor
Mars what it does; yea, very force entangles
Itself with strength. Seal, then, and all is done.--
Eros!--I come, my queen.--Eros!--Stay for me.
Where souls do couch on flowers, we'll hand in hand,
And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze.
Dido and her Aeneas shall want troops,
And all the haunt be ours.--Come, Eros, Eros!
What would my lord?
Detest my baseness. I, that with my sword
Quartered the world and o'er green Neptune's back
With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack
The courage of a woman--less noble mind
Than she which, by her death, our Caesar tells
That when the exigent should come, which now
Is come indeed, when I should see behind me
Th' inevitable prosecution of
Disgrace and horror, that on my command
Thou then wouldst kill me. Do 't. The time is come.
Thou strik'st not me; 'tis Caesar thou defeat'st.
Put color in thy cheek.
Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts,
Though enemy, lost aim and could not?
Wouldst thou be windowed in great Rome and see
Thy master thus with pleached arms, bending down
His corrigible neck, his face subdued
To penetrative shame, whilst the wheeled seat
Of fortunate Caesar, drawn before him, branded
His baseness that ensued?
Come, then, for with a wound I must be cured.
Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn
Most useful for thy country.
When I did make thee free, swor'st thou not then
To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once,
Or thy precedent services are all
But accidents unpurposed. Draw, and come.
Turn from me then that noble countenance
Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.
My sword is drawn.
The thing why thou hast drawn it.
My captain, and my emperor, let me say,
Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.
Farewell, great chief. Shall I strike now?
Why, there, then.	
Thus I do escape the sorrow
Of Antony's death.	
Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what
Have by their brave instruction got upon me
As to a lover's bed. Come then, and, Eros,
Thy master dies thy scholar. To do thus
Not dead?
The guard, ho! O, dispatch me!
Dercetus.]
Of what I have begun!
And time is at his period.
Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.
This sword but shown to Caesar with this tidings
Shall enter me with him.
Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword, and give me
Sufficing strokes for death.
My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.
When did she send thee?
Locked in her monument. She had a prophesying
Of what hath come to pass. For when she saw--
Which never shall be found--you did suspect
She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage
Would not be purged, she sent you word she was
But fearing since how it might work, hath sent
Me to proclaim the truth, and I am come,
Too late, good Diomed. Call my guard, I prithee.
What ho! The Emperor's guard! The guard, what ho!
Come, your lord calls.
Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides.
Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear
All your true followers out.
Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate
To grace it with your sorrows. Bid that welcome
Which comes to punish us, and we punish it,
Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up.
And have my thanks for all.
Charmian and Iras.]
Be comforted, dear madam.
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
But comforts we despise. Our size of sorrow,
Proportioned to our cause, must be as great
As that which makes it.
How now? Is he dead?
His death's upon him, but not dead.
Look out o' th' other side your monument.
His guard have brought him thither.
Burn the great sphere thou mov'st in. Darkling stand
The varying shore o' th' world! O Antony, Antony,
Antony! Help, Charmian! Help, Iras, help!
Help, friends below! Let's draw him hither.
Not Caesar's valor hath o'erthrown Antony,
But Antony's hath triumphed on itself.
So it should be that none but Antony
Should conquer Antony, but woe 'tis so!
Of many thousand kisses the poor last
Dear my lord, pardon, I dare not,
Lest I be taken. Not th' imperious show
Of the full-fortuned Caesar ever shall
Be brooched with me; if knife, drugs, serpents have
Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe.
Your wife Octavia, with her modest eyes
And still conclusion, shall acquire no honor
Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony.--
Help me, my women!--We must draw thee up.--
Assist, good friends.	
Here's sport indeed. How heavy weighs my lord!
Our strength is all gone into heaviness;
That makes the weight. Had I great Juno's power,
The strong-winged Mercury should fetch thee up
And set thee by Jove's side. Yet come a little.
Wishers were ever fools. O, come, come, come!
And welcome, welcome! Die when thou hast lived;
Quicken with kissing. Had my lips that power,
Thus would I wear them out.	
Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.
No, let me speak, and let me rail so high
That the false huswife Fortune break her wheel,
Provoked by my offense.
Of Caesar seek your honor with your safety--O!
They do not go together.
None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.
My resolution and my hands I'll trust,
None about Caesar.
The miserable change now at my end
Lament nor sorrow at, but please your thoughts
In feeding them with those my former fortunes
Wherein I lived the greatest prince o' th' world,
The noblest, and do now not basely die,
Not cowardly put off my helmet to
My countryman--a Roman by a Roman
Valiantly vanquished. Now my spirit is going;
Hast thou no care of me? Shall I abide
In this dull world, which in thy absence is
No better than a sty? O see, my women,
The crown o' th' Earth doth melt.--My lord!
The soldier's pole is fall'n; young boys and girls
Are level now with men. The odds is gone,
And there is nothing left remarkable
Beneath the visiting moon.
No more but e'en a woman, and commanded
By such poor passion as the maid that milks
And does the meanest chares. It were for me
To throw my scepter at the injurious gods,
To tell them that this world did equal theirs
Till they had stolen our jewel. All's but naught.
Patience is sottish, and impatience does
Become a dog that's mad. Then is it sin
To rush into the secret house of death
Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women?
What, what, good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian?
My noble girls! Ah, women, women! Look,
Our lamp is spent; it's out. Good sirs, take heart.
We'll bury him; and then, what's brave, what's
Let's do 't after the high Roman fashion
And make death proud to take us. Come, away.
This case of that huge spirit now is cold.
Ah women, women! Come, we have no friend
But resolution and the briefest end.
Gallus, and Proculeius, his council of war.]
Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield.
Being so frustrate, tell him, he mocks
The pauses that he makes.
Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dar'st
Appear thus to us?
Mark Antony I served, who best was worthy
Best to be served. Whilst he stood up and spoke,
He was my master, and I wore my life
To spend upon his haters. If thou please
To take me to thee, as I was to him
The breaking of so great a thing should make
Should have shook lions into civil streets
And citizens to their dens. The death of Antony
Is not a single doom; in the name lay
Not by a public minister of justice,
Nor by a hired knife, but that self hand
Which writ his honor in the acts it did
Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it,
Splitted the heart. This is his sword.
With his most noble blood.
The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings
To wash the eyes of kings.
That nature must compel us to lament
Our most persisted deeds.
Waged equal with him.
Did steer humanity, but you gods will give us
Some faults to make us men. Caesar is touched.
When such a spacious mirror's set before him,
He needs must see himself.
Diseases in our bodies. I must perforce
Have shown to thee such a declining day
Or look on thine. We could not stall together
In the whole world. But yet let me lament
With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts
That thou my brother, my competitor
In top of all design, my mate in empire,
Friend and companion in the front of war,
The arm of mine own body, and the heart
Where mine his thoughts did kindle--that our stars
Unreconciliable should divide
Our equalness to this. Hear me, good friends--
But I will tell you at some meeter season.
The business of this man looks out of him.
We'll hear him what he says.--Whence are you?
Confined in all she has, her monument,
Of thy intents desires instruction,
That she preparedly may frame herself
To th' way she's forced to.
She soon shall know of us, by some of ours,
How honorable and how kindly we
Determine for her. For Caesar cannot live
To be ungentle.
Come hither, Proculeius. Go and say
We purpose her no shame. Give her what comforts
The quality of her passion shall require,
Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke
She do defeat us, for her life in Rome
Would be eternal in our triumph. Go,
And with your speediest bring us what she says
And how you find of her.
Gallus, go you along.	
Where's Dolabella,
To second Proculeius?
Let him alone, for I remember now
How he's employed. He shall in time be ready.
Go with me to my tent, where you shall see
How hardly I was drawn into this war,
How calm and gentle I proceeded still
In all my writings. Go with me and see
What I can show in this.
My desolation does begin to make
Not being Fortune, he's but Fortune's knave,
To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
Which shackles accidents and bolts up change,
Which sleeps and never palates more the dung,
The beggar's nurse, and Caesar's.
Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt,
And bids thee study on what fair demands
Thou mean'st to have him grant thee.
My name is Proculeius.
Did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but
That have no use for trusting. If your master
Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him
That majesty, to keep decorum, must
No less beg than a kingdom. If he please
To give me conquered Egypt for my son,
He gives me so much of mine own as I
Will kneel to him with thanks.
You're fall'n into a princely hand; fear nothing.
Make your full reference freely to my lord,
Who is so full of grace that it flows over
On all that need. Let me report to him
Your sweet dependency, and you shall find
Where he for grace is kneeled to.
The greatness he has got. I hourly learn
Look him i' th' face.
Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied
Of him that caused it.
You see how easily she may be surprised.
Guard her till Caesar come.
Quick, quick, good hands!
Do not yourself such wrong, who are in this
Relieved, but not betrayed.
That rids our dogs of languish?
Do not abuse my master's bounty by
Th' undoing of yourself. Let the world see
His nobleness well acted, which your death
Will never let come forth.
Come hither, come! Come, come, and take a queen
Worth many babes and beggars.
Sir, I will eat no meat; I'll not drink, sir.
If idle talk will once be necessary--
Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I
Will not wait pinioned at your master's court,
Nor once be chastised with the sober eye
Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up
And show me to the shouting varletry
Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt
Be gentle grave unto me; rather on Nilus' mud
Lay me stark naked, and let the waterflies
Blow me into abhorring; rather make
My country's high pyramides my gibbet
And hang me up in chains!
These thoughts of horror further than you shall
Find cause in Caesar.
What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows,
And he hath sent for thee. For the Queen,
It shall content me best. Be gentle to her.
If you'll employ me to him.
Most noble empress, you have heard of me.
No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.
You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams;
Is 't not your trick?
But such another man.
His face was as the heavens, and therein stuck
The little O, the Earth.
His legs bestrid the ocean, his reared arm
Crested the world. His voice was propertied
As all the tuned spheres, and that to friends;
But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,
He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty,
There was no winter in 't; an autumn 'twas
That grew the more by reaping. His delights
Were dolphin-like; they showed his back above
The element they lived in. In his livery
Walked crowns and crownets; realms and islands
As plates dropped from his pocket.
Think you there was, or might be, such a man
As this I dreamt of?
You lie up to the hearing of the gods!
But if there be nor ever were one such,
It's past the size of dreaming. Nature wants stuff
To vie strange forms with fancy, yet t' imagine
An Antony were nature's piece 'gainst fancy,
Condemning shadows quite.
Your loss is as yourself, great; and you bear it
As answering to the weight. Would I might never
By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites
My very heart at root.
Know you what Caesar means to do with me?
Nay, pray you, sir.
Will have it thus. My master and my lord
The record of what injuries you did us,
Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
As things but done by chance.
To make it clear, but do confess I have
Been laden with like frailties which before
Have often shamed our sex.
We will extenuate rather than enforce.
If you apply yourself to our intents,
Which towards you are most gentle, you shall find
To lay on me a cruelty by taking
Antony's course, you shall bereave yourself
Of my good purposes, and put your children
To that destruction which I'll guard them from
If thereon you rely. I'll take my leave.
And may through all the world. 'Tis yours, and we,
Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall
Hang in what place you please. Here, my good lord.
You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.
This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels
Not petty things admitted.--Where's Seleucus?
This is my treasurer. Let him speak, my lord,
Upon his peril, that I have reserved
To myself nothing.--Speak the truth, Seleucus.
Madam, I had rather seel my lips
Than to my peril speak that which is not.
Enough to purchase what you have made known.
Nay, blush not, Cleopatra. I approve
Your wisdom in the deed.
How pomp is followed! Mine will now be yours,
And should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
The ingratitude of this Seleucus does
Even make me wild.--O slave, of no more trust
Than love that's hired! What, goest thou back? Thou
Go back, I warrant thee! But I'll catch thine eyes
Though they had wings. Slave, soulless villain, dog!
That thou vouchsafing here to visit me,
Doing the honor of thy lordliness
To one so meek, that mine own servant should
Parcel the sum of my disgraces by
Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar,
That I some lady trifles have reserved,
Immoment toys, things of such dignity
As we greet modern friends withal, and say
Some nobler token I have kept apart
For Livia and Octavia, to induce
Their mediation, must I be unfolded
With one that I have bred? The gods! It smites me
Beneath the fall I have.  Prithee, go
Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits
Through th' ashes of my chance. Wert thou a man,
Thou wouldst have mercy on me.
Be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought
For things that others do; and when we fall,
We answer others' merits in our name--
Are therefore to be pitied.
Not what you have reserved nor what acknowledged
Put we i' th' roll of conquest. Still be 't yours!
Bestow it at your pleasure, and believe
Caesar's no merchant to make prize with you
Of things that merchants sold. Therefore be
Make not your thoughts your prisons. No, dear
For we intend so to dispose you as
Yourself shall give us counsel. Feed and sleep.
Our care and pity is so much upon you
That we remain your friend. And so adieu.
My master and my lord!
He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not
Be noble to myself. But hark thee, Charmian.
Finish, good lady. The bright day is done,
And we are for the dark.
Go put it to the haste.
Where's the Queen?
Madam, as thereto sworn by your command,
Which my love makes religion to obey,
Intends his journey, and within three days
You with your children will he send before.
Make your best use of this. I have performed
Your pleasure and my promise.
Adieu, good queen. I must attend on Caesar.
Farewell, and thanks.	
Now, Iras, what think'st thou?
Thou an Egyptian puppet shall be shown
In Rome as well as I. Mechanic slaves
With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers shall
Uplift us to the view. In their thick breaths,
Rank of gross diet, shall we be enclouded
And forced to drink their vapor.
Nay, 'tis most certain, Iras. Saucy lictors
Will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhymers
Ballad us out o' tune. The quick comedians
Extemporally will stage us and present
Our Alexandrian revels. Antony
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness
Are stronger than mine eyes.
To fool their preparation and to conquer
Their most absurd intents.
Now, Charmian!
Show me, my women, like a queen. Go fetch
My best attires. I am again for Cydnus
To meet Mark Antony. Sirrah Iras, go.--
Now, noble Charmian, we'll dispatch indeed,
And when thou hast done this chare, I'll give thee
To play till Doomsday.--Bring our crown and all.
Wherefore's this noise?
That will not be denied your Highness' presence.
He brings you figs.
Let him come in.	
What poor an instrument
May do a noble deed! He brings me liberty.
My resolution's placed, and I have nothing
Of woman in me. Now from head to foot
No planet is of mine.
Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there
That kills and pains not?
Truly, she makes a very good report o' th' worm.
But he that will believe all that they say shall never
Give me my robe. Put on my crown. I have
Immortal longings in me. Now no more
The juice of Egypt's grape shall moist this lip.
Yare, yare, good Iras, quick. Methinks I hear
Antony call. I see him rouse himself
To praise my noble act. I hear him mock
The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men
To excuse their after wrath.--Husband, I come!
Now to that name my courage prove my title.
Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.
Farewell, kind Charmian.--Iras, long farewell.
Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall?
If thou and nature can so gently part,
The stroke of death is as a lover's pinch,
Which hurts and is desired. Dost thou lie still?
If thus thou vanishest, thou tell'st the world
It is not worth leave-taking.
Dissolve, thick cloud, and rain, that I may say
The gods themselves do weep!
If she first meet the curled Antony,
He'll make demand of her, and spend that kiss
Which is my heaven to have.--Come, thou mortal
With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate
Of life at once untie. Poor venomous fool,
Be angry and dispatch. O, couldst thou speak,
That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass
Unpolicied!
Dost thou not see my baby at my breast,
That sucks the nurse asleep?
As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle--
What should I stay--	
Now boast thee, Death, in thy possession lies
And golden Phoebus, never be beheld
Of eyes again so royal. Your crown's awry.
Where's the Queen?
Caesar hath sent--
Approach, ho! All's not well. Caesar's beguiled.
There's Dolabella sent from Caesar. Call him.
What work is here, Charmian? Is this well done?
It is well done, and fitting for a princess
Descended of so many royal kings.
Ah, soldier!	
How goes it here?
Touch their effects in this. Thyself art coming
To see performed the dreaded act which thou
So sought'st to hinder.
That you did fear is done.
She leveled at our purposes and, being royal,
Took her own way. The manner of their deaths?
This was his basket.
This Charmian lived but now; she stood and spake.
On her dead mistress; tremblingly she stood,
And on the sudden dropped.
If they had swallowed poison, 'twould appear
By external swelling; but she looks like sleep,
As she would catch another Antony
In her strong toil of grace.
There is a vent of blood, and something blown.
The like is on her arm.
This is an aspic's trail, and these fig leaves
Have slime upon them, such as th' aspic leaves
Upon the caves of Nile.
That so she died, for her physician tells me
She hath pursued conclusions infinite
Of easy ways to die. Take up her bed,
And bear her women from the monument.
She shall be buried by her Antony.
No grave upon the earth shall clip in it
Strike those that make them; and their story is
No less in pity than his glory which
Brought them to be lamented. Our army shall
In solemn show attend this funeral,
And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see
High order in this great solemnity.
Caius Martius?
He hath faults, with surplus, to tire in
The other side o' th' city is risen. Why stay we prating
What work 's, my countrymen, in hand? Where go
With bats and clubs? The matter? Speak, I pray you.
Senate. They have had inkling this fortnight what
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest
Will you undo yourselves?
We cannot, sir; we are undone already.
Have the patricians of you. For your wants,
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them
Against the Roman state, whose course will on
The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
Of more strong link asunder than can ever
Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,
The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack,
You are transported by calamity
Thither where more attends you, and you slander
The helms o' th' state, who care for you like fathers,
When you curse them as enemies.
Either you must confess yourselves wondrous
Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you
But since it serves my purpose, I will venture
To stale 't a little more.
There was a time when all the body's members
Rebelled against the belly, thus accused it:
That only like a gulf it did remain
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labor with the rest, where th' other instruments
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And, mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite and affection common
Of the whole body. The belly answered--
Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile,
Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus--
For, look you, I may make the belly smile
As well as speak--it tauntingly replied
To th' discontented members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receipt; even so most fitly
As you malign our senators for that
They are not such as you.
The kingly crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The counselor heart, the arm our soldier,
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter,
With other muniments and petty helps
In this our fabric, if that they--
Should by the cormorant belly be restrained,
Who is the sink o' th' body--
The former agents, if they did complain,
What could the belly answer?
If you'll bestow a small--of what you have little--
Patience awhile, you'st hear the belly's answer.
You're long about it.
Your most grave belly was deliberate,
Not rash like his accusers, and thus answered:
Which you do live upon; and fit it is,
Because I am the storehouse and the shop
Of the whole body. But, if you do remember,
Even to the court, the heart, to th' seat o' th' brain;
And, through the cranks and offices of man,
The strongest nerves and small inferior veins
From me receive that natural competency
Whereby they live. And though that all at once,
You, my good friends"--this says the belly, mark
Ay, sir, well, well.
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the flour of all,
And leave me but the bran." What say you to 't?
It was an answer. How apply you this?
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
And you the mutinous members. For examine
Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
Touching the weal o' th' common, you shall find
No public benefit which you receive
But it proceeds or comes from them to you
And no way from yourselves. What do you think,
You, the great toe of this assembly?
For that, being one o' th' lowest, basest, poorest,
Of this most wise rebellion, thou goest foremost.
Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
Lead'st first to win some vantage.
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs.
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle;
The one side must have bale.
Hail, noble Martius.
Thanks.--What's the matter, you dissentious rogues,
That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
Make yourselves scabs?
He that will give good words to thee will flatter
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs,
That like nor peace nor war? The one affrights you;
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you lions, finds you hares;
Where foxes, geese. You are no surer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice
Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is
To make him worthy whose offense subdues him,
And curse that justice did it. Who deserves greatness
Deserves your hate; and your affections are
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Upon your favors swims with fins of lead,
And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang you! Trust
With every minute you do change a mind
And call him noble that was now your hate,
Him vile that was your garland. What's the matter,
That in these several places of the city
You cry against the noble senate, who,
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
Would feed on one another?--What's their seeking?
For corn at their own rates, whereof they say
The city is well stored.
They'll sit by th' fire and presume to know
What's done i' th' Capitol, who's like to rise,
Who thrives, and who declines; side factions and
Conjectural marriages, making parties strong
And feebling such as stand not in their liking
Below their cobbled shoes. They say there's grain
Would the nobility lay aside their ruth
And let me use my sword, I'd make a quarry
With thousands of these quartered slaves as high
As I could pick my lance.
Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded;
For though abundantly they lack discretion,
Yet are they passing cowardly. But I beseech you,
What says the other troop?
They said they were an-hungry, sighed forth
That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat,
That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent
Corn for the rich men only. With these shreds
They vented their complainings, which being
And a petition granted them--a strange one,
To break the heart of generosity
And make bold power look pale--they threw their
As they would hang them on the horns o' th' moon,
Shouting their emulation.
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms,
Of their own choice. One's Junius Brutus,
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not. 'Sdeath!
The rabble should have first unroofed the city
Ere so prevailed with me. It will in time
Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
For insurrection's arguing.
Where's Caius Martius?
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.
Our musty superfluity.
Cominius, Titus Lartius, with other Senators.]
See our best elders.
Martius, 'tis true that you have lately told us:
The Volsces are in arms.
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to 't.
And, were I anything but what I am,
Were half to half the world by th' ears and he
Upon my party, I'd revolt, to make
Only my wars with him. He is a lion
That I am proud to hunt.
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.
It is your former promise.
And I am constant.--Titus Lartius, thou
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face.
What, art thou stiff? Stand'st out?
Ere stay behind this business.
Your company to th' Capitol, where I know
Our greatest friends attend us.
Right worthy you priority.
Hence to your homes, begone.
The Volsces have much corn; take these rats thither
To gnaw their garners.
Worshipful mutineers,
Your valor puts well forth.--Pray follow.
Was ever man so proud as is this Martius?
When we were chosen tribunes for the people--
Marked you his lip and eyes?
Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods--
The present wars devour him! He is grown
Too proud to be so valiant.
Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
Which he treads on at noon. But I do wonder
His insolence can brook to be commanded
Under Cominius.
In whom already he's well graced, cannot
Better be held nor more attained than by
Shall be the General's fault, though he perform
To th' utmost of a man, and giddy censure
Will then cry out of Martius "O, if he
Had borne the business!"
Opinion that so sticks on Martius shall
Of his demerits rob Cominius.
Half all Cominius' honors are to Martius,
Though Martius earned them not, and all his faults
To Martius shall be honors, though indeed
In aught he merit not.
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
More than his singularity, he goes
Upon this present action.
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our counsels
And know how we proceed.
Whatever have been thought on in this state
That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome
Had circumvention? 'Tis not four days gone
Since I heard thence. These are the words--I think
Whether for east or west. The dearth is great.
The people mutinous; and, it is rumored,
Cominius, Martius your old enemy,
Who is of Rome worse hated than of you,
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
These three lead on this preparation
Whither 'tis bent. Most likely 'tis for you.
Consider of it.
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.
To keep your great pretenses veiled till when
They needs must show themselves, which, in the
It seemed, appeared to Rome. By the discovery
We shall be shortened in our aim, which was
To take in many towns ere almost Rome
Should know we were afoot.
Take your commission; hie you to your bands.
Let us alone to guard Corioles.
If they set down before 's, for the remove
Bring up your army. But I think you'll find
They've not prepared for us.
Some parcels of their power are forth already,
And only hitherward. I leave your Honors.
If we and Caius Martius chance to meet,
Till one can do no more.
Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.
Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum,
See him pluck Aufidius down by th' hair;
As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him.
Methinks I see him stamp thus and call thus:
Though you were born in Rome." His bloody brow
With his mailed hand then wiping, forth he goes
Like to a harvestman that's tasked to mow
Or all or lose his hire.
His bloody brow? O Jupiter, no blood!
Away, you fool! It more becomes a man
Than gilt his trophy. The breasts of Hecuba,
When she did suckle Hector, looked not lovelier
Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood
At Grecian sword, contemning.--Tell Valeria
We are fit to bid her welcome.	
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!
He'll beat Aufidius' head below his knee
And tread upon his neck.
What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in
Wednesday half an hour together. H'as such a confirmed
Come, you must go visit the good lady that lies in.
Ithaca full of moths. Come, I would your cambric
Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth, against
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.
My horse to yours, no.
Say, has our general met the enemy?
They lie in view but have not spoke as yet.
So the good horse is mine.
No, I'll nor sell nor give him. Lend you him I will
For half a hundred years.--Summon the town.
Then shall we hear their 'larum and they ours.
Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work,
That we with smoking swords may march from
To help our fielded friends!--Come, blow thy blast.
Tullus Aufidius, is he within your walls?
No, nor a man that fears you less than he:
That's lesser than a little.	
Hark, our drums
Are bringing forth our youth. We'll break our walls
Rather than they shall pound us up. Our gates,
Which yet seem shut, we have but pinned with
They'll open of themselves.	
Hark you, far off!
There is Aufidius. List what work he makes
Amongst your cloven army.
Their noise be our instruction.--Ladders, ho!
They fear us not but issue forth their city.--
Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof than shields.--Advance,
They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts,
Which makes me sweat with wrath.--Come on, my
He that retires, I'll take him for a Volsce,
And he shall feel mine edge.
All the contagion of the south light on you,
You shames of Rome! You herd of--Boils and
Plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorred
Farther than seen, and one infect another
Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese,
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell!
All hurt behind. Backs red, and faces pale
With flight and agued fear! Mend, and charge home,
Or, by the fires of heaven, I'll leave the foe
And make my wars on you. Look to 't. Come on!
If you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their wives,
As they us to our trenches. Follow 's!
So, now the gates are ope. Now prove good
Not for the fliers. Mark me, and do the like.
What is become of Martius?
Following the fliers at the very heels,
With them he enters, who upon the sudden
Clapped to their gates. He is himself alone,
To answer all the city.
Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword,
And when it bows, stand'st up! Thou art left,
Martius.
Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier
Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes, but with thy grim looks and
The thunderlike percussion of thy sounds
Thou mad'st thine enemies shake, as if the world
Were feverous and did tremble.
Let's fetch him off or make remain alike.
See here these movers that do prize their hours
At a cracked drachma. Cushions, leaden spoons,
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would
Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up. Down with them!
And hark, what noise the General makes! To him!
There is the man of my soul's hate, Aufidius,
Piercing our Romans. Then, valiant Titus, take
Convenient numbers to make good the city,
Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste
To help Cominius.
Thy exercise hath been too violent
For a second course of fight.
My work hath yet not warmed me. Fare you well.
The blood I drop is rather physical
Than dangerous to me. To Aufidius thus
Fall deep in love with thee, and her great charms
Misguide thy opposers' swords! Bold gentleman,
Prosperity be thy page!
Than those she placeth highest! So farewell.
Go sound thy trumpet in the marketplace.
Call thither all the officers o' th' town,
Where they shall know our mind. Away!
Breathe you, my friends. Well fought! We are come
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands
Nor cowardly in retire. Believe me, sirs,
We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck,
By interims and conveying gusts we have heard
The charges of our friends. The Roman gods
Lead their successes as we wish our own,
That both our powers, with smiling fronts
May give you thankful sacrifice!
Thy news?
The citizens of Corioles have issued
And given to Lartius and to Martius battle.
And then I came away.
Methinks thou speak'st not well. How long is 't
How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour
And bring thy news so late?
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
Three or four miles about; else had I, sir,
Half an hour since brought my report.	
That does appear as he were flayed? O gods,
He has the stamp of Martius, and I have
Before-time seen him thus.
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabor
More than I know the sound of Martius' tongue
From every meaner man.
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,
But mantled in your own.
In arms as sound as when I wooed, in heart
As merry as when our nuptial day was done
And tapers burnt to bedward!	
Flower of warriors, how is 't with Titus Lartius?
As with a man busied about decrees,
Condemning some to death and some to exile;
Ransoming him or pitying, threat'ning th' other;
Holding Corioles in the name of Rome
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
To let him slip at will.
Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
Where is he? Call him hither.
He did inform the truth. But for our gentlemen,
The common file--a plague! Tribunes for them!--
The mouse ne'er shunned the cat as they did budge
From rascals worse than they.
Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.
Where is the enemy? Are you lords o' th' field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?
Martius, we have at disadvantage fought
And did retire to win our purpose.
How lies their battle? Know you on which side
They have placed their men of trust?
Martius,
Their bands i' th' vaward are the Antiates,
Of their best trust; o'er them Aufidius,
Their very heart of hope.
By all the battles wherein we have fought,
By th' blood we have shed together, by th' vows we
To endure friends, that you directly set me
Against Aufidius and his Antiates,
And that you not delay the present, but,
Filling the air with swords advanced and darts,
We prove this very hour.
You were conducted to a gentle bath
And balms applied to you, yet dare I never
Deny your asking. Take your choice of those
That best can aid your action.
That most are willing. If any such be here--
As it were sin to doubt--that love this painting
Wherein you see me smeared; if any fear
Lesser his person than an ill report;
If any think brave death outweighs bad life,
And that his country's dearer than himself;
Let him alone, or so many so minded,
Wave thus to express his disposition
And follow Martius.	
If these shows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volsces? None of you but is
Able to bear against the great Aufidius
Though thanks to all, must I select from all.
The rest shall bear the business in some other fight,
As cause will be obeyed. Please you to march,
And I shall quickly draw out my command,
Which men are best inclined.
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Divide in all with us.
Martius, enters with a Lieutenant, other Soldiers,
So, let the ports be guarded. Keep your duties
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those centuries to our aid; the rest will serve
For a short holding. If we lose the field,
We cannot keep the town.
Enter Martius and Aufidius at several doors.]
Worse than a promise-breaker.
Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor
More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.
Let the first budger die the other's slave,
And the gods doom him after!
Hollo me like a hare.
Tullus,
Alone I fought in your Corioles' walls
And made what work I pleased. 'Tis not my blood
Wherein thou seest me masked. For thy revenge,
Wrench up thy power to th' highest.
Hector
That was the whip of your bragged progeny,
Thou shouldst not scape me here.
In your condemned seconds.
Aufidius and Martius exit, separately.]
Martius, with his arm in a scarf.]
If I should tell thee o'er this thy day's work,
Thou 't not believe thy deeds. But I'll report it
Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles;
Where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
And, gladly quaked, hear more; where the dull
That with the fusty plebeians hate thine honors,
Shall say against their hearts "We thank the gods
Our Rome hath such a soldier."
Yet cam'st thou to a morsel of this feast,
Having fully dined before.
Here is the steed, we the caparison.
Hadst thou beheld--
Who has a charter to extol her blood,
When she does praise me grieves me. I have done
As you have done--that's what I can;
Induced as you have been--that's for my country.
He that has but effected his good will
Hath overta'en mine act.
The grave of your deserving. Rome must know
The value of her own. 'Twere a concealment
Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
To hide your doings and to silence that
Which, to the spire and top of praises vouched,
Would seem but modest. Therefore, I beseech you--
In sign of what you are, not to reward
What you have done--before our army hear me.
To hear themselves remembered.
Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude
And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses--
Whereof we have ta'en good and good store--of all
The treasure in this field achieved and city,
We render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth
Before the common distribution
At your only choice.
But cannot make my heart consent to take
And stand upon my common part with those
That have beheld the doing.
Cominius and Lartius stand bare.]
May these same instruments, which you profane,
Never sound more! When drums and trumpets shall
Made all of false-faced soothing! When steel grows
Soft as the parasite's silk, let him be made
An ovator for th' wars! No more, I say.
For that I have not washed my nose that bled,
Or foiled some debile wretch--which, without note,
Here's many else have done--you shout me forth
In acclamations hyperbolical,
As if I loved my little should be dieted
In praises sauced with lies.
More cruel to your good report than grateful
To us that give you truly. By your patience,
If 'gainst yourself you be incensed, we'll put you,
Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles,
Then reason safely with you. Therefore be it known,
As to us to all the world, that Caius Martius
Wears this war's garland, in token of the which
My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
With all his trim belonging. And from this time,
For what he did before Corioles, call him,
With all th' applause and clamor of the host,
Martius Caius Coriolanus! Bear
Th' addition nobly ever!
Martius Caius Coriolanus!
And when my face is fair, you shall perceive
Whether I blush or no. Howbeit, I thank you.
To undercrest your good addition
To th' fairness of my power.
Where, ere we do repose us, we will write
To Rome of our success.--You, Titus Lartius,
Must to Corioles back. Send us to Rome
The best, with whom we may articulate
For their own good and ours.
The gods begin to mock me. I, that now
Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg
Of my lord general.
At a poor man's house; he used me kindly.
He cried to me; I saw him prisoner;
But then Aufidius was within my view,
And wrath o'erwhelmed my pity. I request you
To give my poor host freedom.
Were he the butcher of my son, he should
Be free as is the wind.--Deliver him, Titus.
Martius, his name?
Have we no wine here?
The blood upon your visage dries; 'tis time
It should be looked to. Come.
Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition?
What good condition can a treaty find
And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter
As often as we eat. By th' elements,
If e'er again I meet him beard to beard,
He's mine, or I am his. Mine emulation
Hath not that honor in 't it had; for where
True sword to sword, I'll potch at him some way
Or wrath or craft may get him.
Bolder, though not so subtle. My valor's poisoned
With only suff'ring stain by him; for him
Shall fly out of itself. Nor sleep nor sanctuary,
Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,
The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up
Their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst
My hate to Martius. Where I find him, were it
At home, upon my brother's guard, even there,
Against the hospitable canon, would I
Wash my fierce hand in 's heart. Go you to th' city;
Learn how 'tis held and what they are that must
Be hostages for Rome.
How the world goes, that to the pace of it
Soldiers through another.]
Sicinius and Brutus.]
You two are old men; tell me one thing that I shall
Give your dispositions the reins, and be
Lycurguses--if the drink you give me touch my
You are ambitious for poor knaves' caps
When you are hearing a matter between party and
How now, my as fair as noble ladies--and the
For the love of Juno, let's go!
Senate has letters from the General, wherein he
Death, that dark spirit, in 's nervy arm doth lie,
Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.
Captains and Soldiers and a Herald. Trumpets sound.]
Know, Rome, that all alone Martius did fight
Within Corioles' gates, where he hath won,
With fame, a name to Martius Caius; these
In honor follows "Coriolanus."
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus.
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!
No more of this. It does offend my heart.
Pray now, no more.
You have, I know, petitioned all the gods
For my prosperity.	
My gentle Martius, worthy Caius, and
By deed-achieving honor newly named--
What is it? Coriolanus must I call thee?
But, O, thy wife--
Wouldst thou have laughed had I come coffined
That weep'st to see me triumph? Ah, my dear,
Such eyes the widows in Corioles wear
And mothers that lack sons.
And live you yet?  O, my sweet lady,
And, welcome, general.--And you're welcome all.
And I could laugh; I am light and heavy. Welcome.
That is not glad to see thee! You are three
That Rome should dote on; yet, by the faith of men,
We have some old crab trees here at home that will
Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors!
We call a nettle but a nettle, and
The faults of fools but folly.
Give way there, and go on!
Ere in our own house I do shade my head,
The good patricians must be visited,
From whom I have received not only greetings,
But with them change of honors.
To see inherited my very wishes
And the buildings of my fancy. Only
There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but
Our Rome will cast upon thee.
Than sway with them in theirs.
All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights
Are spectacled to see him. Your prattling nurse
Into a rapture lets her baby cry
While she chats him. The kitchen malkin pins
Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck,
Clamb'ring the walls to eye him. Stalls, bulks,
Are smothered up, leads filled, and ridges horsed
With variable complexions, all agreeing
In earnestness to see him. Seld-shown flamens
Do press among the popular throngs and puff
To win a vulgar station. Our veiled dames
Commit the war of white and damask in
Their nicely-gauded cheeks to th' wanton spoil
Of Phoebus' burning kisses. Such a pother,
As if that whatsoever god who leads him
Were slyly crept into his human powers
And gave him graceful posture.
During his power, go sleep.
He cannot temp'rately transport his honors
From where he should begin and end, but will
Lose those he hath won.
The commoners, for whom we stand, but they
Upon their ancient malice will forget
With the least cause these his new honors--which
That he will give them make I as little question
As he is proud to do 't.
Were he to stand for consul, never would he
Appear i' th' marketplace nor on him put
The napless vesture of humility,
Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds
To th' people, beg their stinking breaths.
It was his word. O, he would miss it rather
Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him
And the desire of the nobles.
Than have him hold that purpose and to put it
In execution.
It shall be to him then as our good wills,
To him, or our authority's for an end.
We must suggest the people in what hatred
He still hath held them; that to 's power he would
Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders, and
Dispropertied their freedoms; holding them
In human action and capacity
Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
Than camels in their war, who have their provand
Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
For sinking under them.
At some time when his soaring insolence
Shall touch the people--which time shall not want
If he be put upon 't, and that's as easy
As to set dogs on sheep--will be his fire
To kindle their dry stubble, and their blaze
Shall darken him forever.
You are sent for to the Capitol. 'Tis thought
That Martius shall be consul. I have seen
The dumb men throng to see him, and the blind
To hear him speak; matrons flung gloves,
Ladies and maids their scarves and handkerchiefs,
Upon him as he passed; the nobles bended
As to Jove's statue, and the Commons made
And carry with us ears and eyes for th' time,
But hearts for the event.
Therefore, for Coriolanus neither to care whether
Make way. They are coming.
Cominius the consul. The Patricians sit. Sicinius
Coriolanus stands.]
Having determined of the Volsces and
To send for Titus Lartius, it remains,
As the main point of this our after-meeting,
To gratify his noble service that
Hath thus stood for his country. Therefore please
Most reverend and grave elders, to desire
The present consul and last general
In our well-found successes to report
By Martius Caius Coriolanus, whom
We met here both to thank and to remember
With honors like himself.	
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our state's defective for requital,
Than we to stretch it out. 
Masters o' th' people,
We do request your kindest ears and, after,
Your loving motion toward the common body
To yield what passes here.
Upon a pleasing treaty and have hearts
Inclinable to honor and advance
The theme of our assembly.
We shall be blest to do if he remember
He hath hereto prized them at.
To hear Cominius speak?
But yet my caution was more pertinent
Than the rebuke you give it.
But tie him not to be their bedfellow.--
Worthy Cominius, speak.
Nay, keep your place.
Sit, Coriolanus. Never shame to hear
What you have nobly done.
Than hear say how I got them.
My words disbenched you not?
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurt not; but your
When the alarum were struck than idly sit
To hear my nothings monstered.	
Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter--
That's thousand to one good one--when you now
He had rather venture all his limbs for honor
Than one on 's ears to hear it.--Proceed, Cominius.
Should not be uttered feebly. It is held
That valor is the chiefest virtue and
Most dignifies the haver; if it be,
The man I speak of cannot in the world
Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years,
When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought
Beyond the mark of others. Our then dictator,
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight
When with his Amazonian chin he drove
The bristled lips before him. He bestrid
An o'erpressed Roman and i' th' Consul's view
Slew three opposers. Tarquin's self he met
And struck him on his knee. In that day's feats,
When he might act the woman in the scene,
He proved best man i' th' field and for his meed
Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age
Man-entered thus, he waxed like a sea,
And in the brunt of seventeen battles since
He lurched all swords of the garland. For this last,
Before and in Corioles, let me say,
And by his rare example made the coward
Turn terror into sport. As weeds before
And fell below his stem. His sword, Death's stamp,
Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot
He was a thing of blood, whose every motion
Was timed with dying cries. Alone he entered
The mortal gate o' th' city, which he painted
With shunless destiny; aidless came off
And with a sudden reinforcement struck
Corioles like a planet. Now all's his,
When by and by the din of war gan pierce
His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit
Requickened what in flesh was fatigate,
And to the battle came he, where he did
Run reeking o'er the lives of men as if
Both field and city ours, he never stood
To ease his breast with panting.
He cannot but with measure fit the honors
Which we devise him.
And looked upon things precious as they were
The common muck of the world. He covets less
Than misery itself would give, rewards
His deeds with doing them, and is content
To spend the time to end it.
Let him be called for.
The Senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased
To make thee consul.
My life and services.
That you do speak to the people.
Let me o'erleap that custom, for I cannot
Put on the gown, stand naked, and entreat them
For my wounds' sake to give their suffrage. Please
That I may pass this doing.
Must have their voices; neither will they bate
One jot of ceremony.
Pray you, go fit you to the custom, and
Take to you, as your predecessors have,
Your honor with your form.
That I shall blush in acting, and might well
Be taken from the people.
To brag unto them "Thus I did, and thus!"
Show them th' unaching scars, which I should hide,
As if I had received them for the hire
Of their breath only!
We recommend to you, tribunes of the people,
Our purpose to them, and to our noble consul
Wish we all joy and honor.
To Coriolanus come all joy and honor!
Brutus remain.]
You see how he intends to use the people.
May they perceive 's intent! He will require them
As if he did contemn what he requested
Should be in them to give.
Of our proceedings here. On th' marketplace
Ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to
But if it were at liberty, 'twould sure
But that's no matter; the greater part carries it. I
Here he comes, and in the gown of humility. Mark
Therefore follow me, and I'll direct you how you
The worthiest men have done 't?
My tongue to such a pace. "Look, sir, my wounds!
Some certain of your brethren roared and ran
From th' noise of our own drums."
You must not speak of that. You must desire them
To think upon you.
Which our divines lose by 'em.
In wholesome manner.	
And keep their teeth clean.
So, here comes a brace.--
You know the cause, sir, of my standing here.
We do, sir. Tell us what hath brought you to 't.
Better it is to die, better to starve,
Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here
To beg of Hob and Dick that does appear
Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to 't.
What custom wills, in all things should we do 't?
The dust on antique time would lie unswept
And mountainous error be too highly heaped
For truth to o'erpeer. Rather than fool it so,
Let the high office and the honor go
To one that would do thus. I am half through;
The one part suffered, the other will I do.
Here come more voices.--
Your voices! For your voices I have fought;
Watched for your voices; for your voices bear
Of wounds two dozen odd. Battles thrice six
Done many things, some less, some more. Your
Indeed, I would be consul.
You have stood your limitation, and the Tribunes
Endue you with the people's voice. Remains
That in th' official marks invested, you
Anon do meet the Senate.
The custom of request you have discharged.
The people do admit you, and are summoned
To meet anon upon your approbation.
Where? At the Senate House?
May I change these garments?
That I'll straight do and, knowing myself again,
Repair to th' Senate House.
We stay here for the people.
He has it now; and by his looks, methinks,
His humble weeds. Will you dismiss the people?
How now, my masters, have you chose this man?
We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.
Amen, sir. To my poor unworthy notice,
He mocked us when he begged our voices.
Certainly, he flouted us downright.
No, 'tis his kind of speech. He did not mock us.
Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says
He used us scornfully. He should have showed us
His marks of merit, wounds received for 's country.
He said he had wounds, which he could show in
And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn,
But by your voices, will not so permit me;
Your voices therefore." When we granted that,
Here was "I thank you for your voices. Thank you.
Your most sweet voices! Now you have left your
Why either were you ignorant to see 't
Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness
To yield your voices?
As you were lessoned? When he had no power,
But was a petty servant to the state,
He was your enemy, ever spake against
Your liberties and the charters that you bear
If he should still malignantly remain
Fast foe to th' plebeii, your voices might
Be curses to yourselves. You should have said
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
Would think upon you for your voices, and
Translate his malice towards you into love,
Standing your friendly lord.
As you were fore-advised, had touched his spirit
And tried his inclination; from him plucked
Either his gracious promise, which you might,
As cause had called you up, have held him to;
Or else it would have galled his surly nature,
Which easily endures not article
Tying him to aught. So putting him to rage,
You should have ta'en th' advantage of his choler
And passed him unelected.
He did solicit you in free contempt
When he did need your loves, and do you think
That his contempt shall not be bruising to you
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your
No heart among you? Or had you tongues to cry
Against the rectorship of judgment?
Have you ere now denied the asker? And now
Again, of him that did not ask but mock,
Bestow your sued-for tongues?
We may deny him yet.
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends
They have chose a consul that will from them take
Their liberties, make them of no more voice
Than dogs that are as often beat for barking
As therefor kept to do so.
And, on a safer judgment, all revoke
Your ignorant election. Enforce his pride
And his old hate unto you. Besides, forget not
With what contempt he wore the humble weed,
How in his suit he scorned you; but your loves,
Thinking upon his services, took from you
Th' apprehension of his present portance,
Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion
After the inveterate hate he bears you.
No impediment between, but that you must
Cast your election on him.
More after our commandment than as guided
By your own true affections, and that your minds,
Preoccupied with what you rather must do
Than what you should, made you against the grain
To voice him consul. Lay the fault on us.
Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you,
How youngly he began to serve his country,
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
The noble house o' th' Martians, from whence came
That Ancus Martius, Numa's daughter's son,
Who after great Hostilius here was king,
Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
That our best water brought by conduits hither;
And Censorinus, that was so surnamed,
And nobly named so, twice being censor,
Was his great ancestor.
That hath besides well in his person wrought
To be set high in place, we did commend
To your remembrances; but you have found,
Scaling his present bearing with his past,
That he's your fixed enemy, and revoke
Your sudden approbation.
Harp on that still--but by our putting on.
And presently, when you have drawn your number,
Repair to th' Capitol.
Repent in their election.	
This mutiny were better put in hazard
Than stay, past doubt, for greater.
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
With their refusal, both observe and answer
The vantage of his anger.
We will be there before the stream o' th' people,
And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own,
Which we have goaded onward.
Cominius, Titus Lartius, and other Senators.]
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?
He had, my lord, and that it was which caused
Our swifter composition.
So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road
Upon 's again.
That we shall hardly in our ages see
Their banners wave again.
On safeguard he came to me, and did curse
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
Yielded the town. He is retired to Antium.
Spoke he of me?
How often he had met you sword to sword;
That of all things upon the earth he hated
Your person most; that he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be called your vanquisher.
To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.
Behold, these are the tribunes of the people,
The tongues o' th' common mouth. I do despise
For they do prank them in authority
Against all noble sufferance.
It will be dangerous to go on. No further.
Hath he not passed the noble and the common?
Cominius, no.
Tribunes, give way. He shall to th' marketplace.
The people are incensed against him.
Or all will fall in broil.
Must these have voices, that can yield them now
And straight disclaim their tongues? What are your
You being their mouths, why rule you not their
Have you not set them on?
It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot,
To curb the will of the nobility.
Suffer 't, and live with such as cannot rule
Nor ever will be ruled.
The people cry you mocked them; and, of late,
When corn was given them gratis, you repined,
Scandaled the suppliants for the people, called them
Timepleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.
Why, this was known before.
Have you informed them sithence?
Not unlike, each way, to better yours.
Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Your fellow tribune.
For which the people stir. If you will pass
To where you are bound, you must inquire your
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Or never be so noble as a consul,
Nor yoke with him for tribune.
The people are abused, set on. This palt'ring
Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus
Deserved this so dishonored rub, laid falsely
This was my speech, and I will speak 't again.
Not now, not now.
My nobler friends, I crave their pardons. For
The mutable, rank-scented meiny, let them
Regard me, as I do not flatter, and
Therein behold themselves. I say again,
In soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate
The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition,
Which we ourselves have plowed for, sowed, and
By mingling them with us, the honored number,
Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that
Which they have given to beggars.
No more words, we beseech you.
As for my country I have shed my blood,
Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs
Coin words till their decay against those measles
Which we disdain should tetter us, yet sought
The very way to catch them.
As if you were a god to punish, not
We let the people know 't.
Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
By Jove, 'twould be my mind.
That shall remain a poison where it is,
Not poison any further.
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? Mark you
His absolute "shall"?
You grave but reckless senators, have you thus
Given Hydra here to choose an officer,
That with his peremptory "shall," being but
The horn and noise o' th' monster's, wants not spirit
To say he'll turn your current in a ditch
And make your channel his? If he have power,
Then vail your ignorance; if none, awake
Your dangerous lenity. If you are learned,
Be not as common fools; if you are not,
Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians,
If they be senators; and they are no less
When, both your voices blended, the great'st taste
Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate,
And such a one as he, who puts his "shall,"
His popular "shall," against a graver bench
Than ever frowned in Greece. By Jove himself,
It makes the consuls base! And my soul aches
To know, when two authorities are up,
Neither supreme, how soon confusion
May enter 'twixt the gap of both and take
The one by th' other.
Whoever gave that counsel to give forth
The corn o' th' storehouse gratis, as 'twas used
Sometime in Greece--
Though there the people had more absolute power,
The ruin of the state.
One that speaks thus their voice?
More worthier than their voices. They know the
Was not our recompense, resting well assured
They ne'er did service for 't. Being pressed to th' war,
Even when the navel of the state was touched,
They would not thread the gates. This kind of
Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i' th' war,
Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they showed
Most valor, spoke not for them. Th' accusation
Which they have often made against the Senate,
All cause unborn, could never be the native
Of our so frank donation. Well, what then?
How shall this bosom multiplied digest
The Senate's courtesy? Let deeds express
What's like to be their words: "We did request it;
We are the greater poll, and in true fear
They gave us our demands." Thus we debase
The nature of our seats and make the rabble
Call our cares fears, which will in time
Break ope the locks o' th' Senate and bring in
The crows to peck the eagles.
Enough, with over-measure.
What may be sworn by, both divine and human,
Seal what I end withal! This double worship--
Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
Insult without all reason, where gentry, title,
Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
Of general ignorance--it must omit
Real necessities and give way the while
To unstable slightness. Purpose so barred, it follows
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech
You that will be less fearful than discreet,
That love the fundamental part of state
More than you doubt the change on 't, that prefer
To jump a body with a dangerous physic
That's sure of death without it--at once pluck out
The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick
The sweet which is their poison. Your dishonor
Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state
Of that integrity which should become 't,
Not having the power to do the good it would
For th' ill which doth control 't.
As traitors do.
What should the people do with these bald tribunes,
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To th' greater bench? In a rebellion,
When what's not meet but what must be was law,
Then were they chosen. In a better hour,
Let what is meet be said it must be meet,
And throw their power i' th' dust.
Go, call the people;  in whose name
Attach thee as a traitorous innovator,
And follow to thine answer.
We'll surety him.
Hence, rotten thing, or I shall shake thy bones
Out of thy garments.
Here's he that would take from you all your power.
Tribunes, patricians, citizens, what ho!
Sicinius, Brutus, Coriolanus, citizens!
What is about to be? I am out of breath.
Confusion's near. I cannot speak. You, tribunes
To th' people!--Coriolanus, patience!--
Speak, good Sicinius.
Let's hear our tribune. Peace! Speak, speak, speak.
You are at point to lose your liberties.
Martius would have all from you, Martius,
Whom late you have named for consul.
This is the way to kindle, not to quench.
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.
What is the city but the people?
The people are the city.
By the consent of all, we were established
The people's magistrates.
That is the way to lay the city flat,
To bring the roof to the foundation
And bury all which yet distinctly ranges
In heaps and piles of ruin.
Or let us stand to our authority
Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce,
Upon the part o' th' people, in whose power
We were elected theirs, Martius is worthy
Of present death.
Bear him to th' rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into destruction cast him.
Yield, Martius, yield!
Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.
Be that you seem, truly your country's friend,
And temp'rately proceed to what you would
Thus violently redress.
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
Where the disease is violent.--Lay hands upon him,
And bear him to the rock.
There's some among you have beheld me fighting.
Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.
Down with that sword!--Tribunes, withdraw awhile.
Lay hands upon him!
You that be noble, help him, young and old!
Go, get you to your house. Begone, away.
All will be naught else.
We have as many friends as enemies.
Shall it be put to that?
Leave us to cure this cause.
You cannot tent yourself. Begone, beseech you.
Though in Rome littered; not Romans, as they are
Though calved i' th' porch o' th' Capitol.
Put not your worthy rage into your tongue.
One time will owe another.
Take up a brace o' th' best of them, yea, the two
But now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic,
And manhood is called foolery when it stands
Against a falling fabric.  Will you
Before the tag return, whose rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters and o'erbear
What they are used to bear?
With those that have but little. This must be patched
With cloth of any color.
His nature is too noble for the world.
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident
Or Jove for 's power to thunder. His heart's his
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent,
And, being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the name of death.	
Here's goodly work.
Could he not speak 'em fair?
That would depopulate the city and
Be every man himself?
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands. He hath resisted law,
And therefore law shall scorn him further trial
Than the severity of the public power
Which he so sets at naught.
The noble tribunes are the people's mouths
And we their hands.
Do not cry havoc where you should but hunt
With modest warrant.
Have holp to make this rescue?
As I do know the Consul's worthiness,
So can I name his faults.
If, by the Tribunes' leave, and yours, good people,
The which shall turn you to no further harm
Than so much loss of time.
For we are peremptory to dispatch
This viperous traitor. To eject him hence
Were but one danger, and to keep him here
Our certain death. Therefore it is decreed
He dies tonight.
That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude
Towards her deserved children is enrolled
In Jove's own book, like an unnatural dam
Should now eat up her own.
He's a disease that must be cut away.
Mortal to cut it off; to cure it easy.
What has he done to Rome that's worthy death?
Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost--
Which I dare vouch is more than that he hath
By many an ounce--he dropped it for his country;
And what is left, to lose it by his country
Were to us all that do 't and suffer it
Merely awry. When he did love his country,
It honored him.
Being once gangrened, is not then respected
For what before it was.
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence,
Lest his infection, being of catching nature,
Spread further.
This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
The harm of unscanned swiftness, will too late
Tie leaden pounds to 's heels. Proceed by process,
Lest parties--as he is beloved--break out
And sack great Rome with Romans.
Have we not had a taste of his obedience?
Our aediles smote! Ourselves resisted! Come.
Consider this: he has been bred i' th' wars
Since he could draw a sword, and is ill schooled
In bolted language; meal and bran together
He throws without distinction. Give me leave,
Where he shall answer by a lawful form,
In peace, to his utmost peril.
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Unknown to the beginning.
Be you then as the people's officer.--
Masters, lay down your weapons.
Meet on the marketplace.  We'll
Where if you bring not Martius, we'll proceed
In our first way.
Or what is worst will follow.
Let them pull all about mine ears, present me
Death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
That the precipitation might down stretch
Below the beam of sight, yet will I still
Be thus to them.
Does not approve me further, who was wont
To call them woolen vassals, things created
To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads
In congregations, to yawn, be still, and wonder
When one but of my ordinance stood up
To speak of peace or war.
Why did you wish me milder? Would you have me
False to my nature? Rather say I play
The man I am.
Before you had worn it out.
You might have been enough the man you are
With striving less to be so. Lesser had been
The thwartings of your dispositions if
You had not showed them how you were disposed
Ere they lacked power to cross you.
Come, come, you have been too rough, something
You must return and mend it.
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
Cleave in the midst and perish.
But yet a brain that leads my use of anger
To better vantage.
Before he should thus stoop to th' herd--but that
The violent fit o' th' time craves it as physic
For the whole state--I would put mine armor on,
Which I can scarcely bear.
Return to th' Tribunes.
For them? I cannot do it to the gods.
Must I then do 't to them?
Though therein you can never be too noble
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say
Honor and policy, like unsevered friends,
In peace what each of them by th' other lose
That they combine not there?
If it be honor in your wars to seem
The same you are not, which for your best ends
You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse
That it shall hold companionship in peace
With honor as in war, since that to both
It stands in like request?
Because that now it lies you on to speak
To th' people, not by your own instruction,
Nor by th' matter which your heart prompts you,
But with such words that are but roted in
Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
Of no allowance to your bosom's truth.
Now, this no more dishonors you at all
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Which else would put you to your fortune and
The hazard of much blood.
My fortunes and my friends at stake required
Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles;
And you will rather show our general louts
How you can frown than spend a fawn upon 'em
For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard
Of what that want might ruin.
Come, go with us; speak fair. You may salve so,
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
Of what is past.
Go to them with this bonnet in thy hand,
And thus far having stretched it--here be with
Thy knee bussing the stones--for in such business
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of th' ignorant
More learned than the ears--waving thy head,
Which often thus correcting thy stout heart,
Now humble as the ripest mulberry
That will not hold the handling. Or say to them
Thou art their soldier and, being bred in broils,
Hast not the soft way, which thou dost confess
Were fit for thee to use as they to claim,
In asking their good loves; but thou wilt frame
Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far
As thou hast power and person.
Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours;
For they have pardons, being asked, as free
As words to little purpose.
Go, and be ruled; although I know thou hadst rather
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf
Than flatter him in a bower.
Here is Cominius.
You make strong party or defend yourself
By calmness or by absence. All's in anger.
Only fair speech.
Can thereto frame his spirit.
Prithee, now, say you will, and go about it.
Must I go show them my unbarbed sconce? Must I
With my base tongue give to my noble heart
Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
This mold of Martius, they to dust should grind it
And throw 't against the wind. To th' marketplace!
You have put me now to such a part which never
My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
To have my praise for this, perform a part
Thou hast not done before.
Away, my disposition, and possess me
Some harlot's spirit! My throat of war be turned,
Which choired with my drum, into a pipe
Small as an eunuch or the virgin voice
That babies lull asleep! The smiles of knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up
The glasses of my sight! A beggar's tongue
Make motion through my lips, and my armed knees,
Who bowed but in my stirrup, bend like his
That hath received an alms. I will not do 't,
Lest I surcease to honor mine own truth
And, by my body's action, teach my mind
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonor
Than thou of them. Come all to ruin. Let
Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear
Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list.
Thy valiantness was mine; thou suck'st it from me,
But owe thy pride thyself.
Mother, I am going to the marketplace.
Chide me no more. I'll mountebank their loves,
Cog their hearts from them, and come home
Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going.
Commend me to my wife. I'll return consul,
Or never trust to what my tongue can do
Away! The Tribunes do attend you. Arm yourself
To answer mildly, for they are prepared
With accusations, as I hear, more strong
Than are upon you yet.
The word is "mildly." Pray you, let us go.
Let them accuse me by invention, I
Will answer in mine honor.
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannical power. If he evade us there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the spoil got on the Antiates
Was ne'er distributed.
What, will he come?
With old Menenius, and those senators
That always favored him.
Of all the voices that we have procured,
Set down by th' poll?
Have you collected them by tribes?
Assemble presently the people hither;
And when they hear me say "It shall be so
For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them
If I say "Fine," cry "Fine," if "Death," cry "Death,"
Insisting on the old prerogative
And power i' th' truth o' th' cause.
And when such time they have begun to cry,
Let them not cease, but with a din confused
Enforce the present execution
Of what we chance to sentence.
Make them be strong and ready for this hint
When we shall hap to give 't them.
Put him to choler straight. He hath been used
Ever to conquer and to have his worth
Of contradiction. Being once chafed, he cannot
Be reined again to temperance; then he speaks
What's in his heart, and that is there which looks
With us to break his neck.
Ay, as an hostler that for th' poorest piece
Will bear the knave by th' volume.--Th' honored
Keep Rome in safety and the chairs of justice
Supplied with worthy men! Plant love among 's!
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace
And not our streets with war!
List to your tribunes. Audience! Peace, I say!
Shall I be charged no further than this present?
Must all determine here?
If you submit you to the people's voices,
Allow their officers, and are content
To suffer lawful censure for such faults
As shall be proved upon you.
Lo, citizens, he says he is content.
The warlike service he has done, consider. Think
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
Like graves i' th' holy churchyard.
Scars to move laughter only.
That when he speaks not like a citizen,
You find him like a soldier. Do not take
His rougher accents for malicious sounds,
But, as I say, such as become a soldier
Rather than envy you.
That, being passed for consul with full voice,
You take it off again?
We charge you that you have contrived to take
From Rome all seasoned office and to wind
Yourself into a power tyrannical,
For which you are a traitor to the people.
How? Traitor?
The fires i' th' lowest hell fold in the people!
Call me their traitor? Thou injurious tribune!
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths,
In thy hands clutched as many millions, in
Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say
As I do pray the gods.
We need not put new matter to his charge.
What you have seen him do and heard him speak,
Beating your officers, cursing yourselves,
Opposing laws with strokes, and here defying
Those whose great power must try him--even this,
So criminal and in such capital kind,
Deserves th' extremest death.
Served well for Rome--
Is this the promise that you made your mother?
Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, flaying, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word,
Nor check my courage for what they can give,
To have 't with saying "Good morrow."
As much as in him lies, from time to time
Envied against the people, seeking means
To pluck away their power, as now at last
Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
That doth distribute it, in the name o' th' people
And in the power of us the Tribunes, we,
Even from this instant, banish him our city
In peril of precipitation
From off the rock Tarpeian, never more
To enter our Rome gates. I' th' people's name,
It shall be so, it shall be so! Let him away!
He's banished, and it shall be so.
Hear me, my masters and my common friends--
He's sentenced. No more hearing.
Her enemies' marks upon me. I do love
My country's good with a respect more tender,
More holy and profound, than mine own life,
My dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase,
And treasure of my loins. Then if I would
Speak that--
There's no more to be said, but he is banished
As enemy to the people and his country.
It shall be so.
You common cry of curs, whose breath I hate
As reek o' th' rotten fens, whose loves I prize
As the dead carcasses of unburied men
That do corrupt my air, I banish you!
And here remain with your uncertainty;
Let every feeble rumor shake your hearts;
Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
Fan you into despair! Have the power still
To banish your defenders, till at length
Your ignorance--which finds not till it feels,
Making but reservation of yourselves,
Still your own foes--deliver you
As most abated captives to some nation
That won you without blows! Despising
For you the city, thus I turn my back.
There is a world elsewhere.
The people's enemy is gone, is gone.
Our enemy is banished; he is gone. Hoo, hoo!
Go see him out at gates, and follow him,
As he hath followed you, with all despite.
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard
Attend us through the city.
Come, come, let's see him out at gates! Come!
The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come!
Cominius, with the young nobility of Rome.]
Come, leave your tears. A brief farewell. The beast
With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother,
Where is your ancient courage? You were used
To say extremities was the trier of spirits;
That common chances common men could bear;
That when the sea was calm, all boats alike
Showed mastership in floating; fortune's blows
When most struck home, being gentle wounded
With precepts that would make invincible
The heart that conned them.
Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
And occupations perish!
Resume that spirit when you were wont to say
If you had been the wife of Hercules,
Six of his labors you'd have done and saved
Your husband so much sweat.--Cominius,
Droop not. Adieu.--Farewell, my wife, my mother.
Thy tears are salter than a younger man's
And venomous to thine eyes.--My sometime
Heart-hard'ning spectacles. Tell these sad women
As 'tis to laugh at 'em.--My mother, you wot well
My hazards still have been your solace, and--
Believe 't not lightly--though I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon that his fen
Makes feared and talked of more than seen, your
Will or exceed the common or be caught
With cautelous baits and practice.
Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
With thee awhile. Determine on some course
More than a wild exposure to each chance
That starts i' th' way before thee.
Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us
And we of thee; so if the time thrust forth
And lose advantage, which doth ever cool
Thou hast years upon thee, and thou art too full
Of the wars' surfeits to go rove with one
That's yet unbruised. Bring me but out at gate.--
Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
My friends of noble touch. When I am forth,
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come.
While I remain above the ground, you shall
Hear from me still, and never of me aught
But what is like me formerly.
As any ear can hear. Come, let's not weep.
If I could shake off but one seven years
From these old arms and legs, by the good gods,
Come.
Bid them all home. He's gone, and we'll no further.
The nobility are vexed, whom we see have sided
In his behalf.
Let us seem humbler after it is done
Than when it was a-doing.
Say their great enemy is gone, and they
Stand in their ancient strength.
Here comes his mother.
They have ta'en note of us. Keep on your way.
Requite your love!
If that I could for weeping, you should hear--
Nay, and you shall hear some.  Will
You shall stay too. I would I had the power
To say so to my husband.
Ay, fool, is that a shame? Note but this, fool.
Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
Than thou hast spoken words?
More noble blows than ever thou wise words,
And for Rome's good. I'll tell thee what--yet go.
Nay, but thou shalt stay too. I would my son
Were in Arabia and thy tribe before him,
His good sword in his hand.
He'd make an end of thy posterity.
Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!
As he began, and not unknit himself
The noble knot he made.
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth
As I can of those mysteries which heaven
Will not have Earth to know.
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:
As far as doth the Capitol exceed
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son--
This lady's husband here, this, do you see?--
Whom you have banished, does exceed you all.
Well, well, we'll leave you.
With one that wants her wits?	
But to confirm my curses. Could I meet 'em
But once a day, it would unclog my heart
Of what lies heavy to 't.
And, by my troth, you have cause. You'll sup with
Anger's my meat. I sup upon myself
And so shall starve with feeding.
Leave this faint puling, and lament as I do,
In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.	
What's the news in Rome? I have a note from the
Volscian state to find you out there. You have well
Nicanor.
Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his
So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of
Of these fair edifices 'fore my wars
Have I heard groan and drop. Then, know me not,
Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones
In puny battle slay me.
Save you, sir.
And you.
Where great Aufidius lies. Is he in Antium?
He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
At his house this night.
This here before you.
Whose double bosoms seems to wear one heart,
Whose hours, whose bed, whose meal and exercise
Are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love
Unseparable, shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a doit, break out
To bitterest enmity; so fellest foes,
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
And interjoin their issues. So with me:
My birthplace hate I, and my love's upon
This enemy town. I'll enter. If he slay me,
He does fair justice; if he give me way,
Appear not like a guest.
Whence are you? Here's no place for you. Pray, go
In being Coriolanus.
Pray you, avoid the house.
Thy name? Why speak'st not? Speak, man. What's
Not yet thou know'st me, and seeing me, dost not
Think me for the man I am, necessity
Commands me name myself.
And harsh in sound to thine.
Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face
Bears a command in 't. Though thy tackle's torn,
Thou show'st a noble vessel. What's thy name?
Prepare thy brow to frown. Know'st thou me yet?
My name is Caius Martius, who hath done
To thee particularly and to all the Volsces
Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may
My surname Coriolanus. The painful service,
The extreme dangers, and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankless country are requited
But with that surname, a good memory
And witness of the malice and displeasure
Which thou shouldst bear me. Only that name
The cruelty and envy of the people,
Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
Have all forsook me, hath devoured the rest,
And suffered me by th' voice of slaves to be
Whooped out of Rome. Now this extremity
Hath brought me to thy hearth, not out of hope--
Mistake me not--to save my life; for if
To be full quit of those my banishers,
Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast
Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims
Of shame seen through thy country, speed thee
And make my misery serve thy turn. So use it
That my revengeful services may prove
As benefits to thee, for I will fight
Against my cankered country with the spleen
Of all the under fiends. But if so be
Thou dar'st not this, and that to prove more fortunes
Thou 'rt tired, then, in a word, I also am
Longer to live most weary, and present
My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice,
Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,
Since I have ever followed thee with hate,
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breast,
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
It be to do thee service.
Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my
Should from yond cloud speak divine things
And say 'tis true, I'd not believe them more
Than thee, all-noble Martius. Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, whereagainst
My grained ash an hundred times hath broke
And scarred the moon with splinters.
Here I clip
The anvil of my sword and do contest
As hotly and as nobly with thy love
As ever in ambitious strength I did
Contend against thy valor. Know thou first,
Sighed truer breath. But that I see thee here,
Thou noble thing, more dances my rapt heart
Than when I first my wedded mistress saw
Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars, I tell thee
We have a power on foot, and I had purpose
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn
Or lose mine arm for 't. Thou hast beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me;
We have been down together in my sleep,
Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat,
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Martius,
Had we no other quarrel else to Rome but that
Thou art thence banished, we would muster all
From twelve to seventy and, pouring war
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold flood o'erbear 't. O, come, go in,
And take our friendly senators by th' hands,
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
Who am prepared against your territories,
Though not for Rome itself.
Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have
The leading of thine own revenges, take
Th' one half of my commission and set down--
As best thou art experienced, since thou know'st
Thy country's strength and weakness--thine own
Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,
Or rudely visit them in parts remote
To fright them ere destroy. But come in.
Let me commend thee first to those that shall
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes!
And more a friend than ere an enemy--
Yet, Martius, that was much. Your hand. Most
Would I were hanged but I thought there was
He was ever too hard for him; I have heard him
We hear not of him, neither need we fear him.
His remedies are tame--the present peace,
And quietness of the people, which before
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends
Blush that the world goes well, who rather had,
Though they themselves did suffer by 't, behold
Dissentious numbers pest'ring streets than see
Our tradesmen singing in their shops and going
About their functions friendly.
We stood to 't in good time.
Is this Menenius?
Of late.--Hail, sir.
Your Coriolanus is not much missed
But with his friends. The commonwealth doth stand,
And so would do were he more angry at it.
All's well, and might have been much better if
He could have temporized.
His mother and his wife hear nothing from him.
The gods preserve
Good e'en to you all, good e'en to you all.
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees
Are bound to pray for you both.
Farewell, kind neighbors. We wished Coriolanus
Had loved you as we did.
This is a happier and more comely time
Than when these fellows ran about the streets
Crying confusion.
Self-loving.
And affecting one sole throne, without assistance.
We should by this, to all our lamentation,
If he had gone forth consul, found it so.
The gods have well prevented it, and Rome
Sits safe and still without him.
There is a slave, whom we have put in prison,
Reports the Volsces with two several powers
Are entered in the Roman territories,
And with the deepest malice of the war
Destroy what lies before 'em.
Who, hearing of our Martius' banishment,
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world,
Which were inshelled when Martius stood for Rome,
And durst not once peep out.
Go see this rumorer whipped. It cannot be
The Volsces dare break with us.
We have record that very well it can,
And three examples of the like hath been
Within my age. But reason with the fellow
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
Lest you shall chance to whip your information
And beat the messenger who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded.
The nobles in great earnestness are going
All to the Senate House. Some news is coming
That turns their countenances.
Go whip him 'fore the people's eyes--his raising,
Nothing but his report.
The slave's report is seconded, and more,
More fearful, is delivered.
It is spoke freely out of many mouths--
How probable I do not know--that Martius,
Joined with Aufidius, leads a power 'gainst Rome
And vows revenge as spacious as between
The young'st and oldest thing.
Raised only that the weaker sort may wish
Good Martius home again.
He and Aufidius can no more atone
Than violent'st contrariety.
Associated with Aufidius, rages
Upon our territories, and have already
What lay before them.
You have holp to ravish your own daughters and
To melt the city leads upon your pates,
To see your wives dishonored to your noses--
Your temples burned in their cement, and
Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined
Into an auger's bore.
You have made fair work, I fear me.--Pray, your
If Martius should be joined with Volscians--
He is their god; he leads them like a thing
Made by some other deity than Nature,
That shapes man better; and they follow him
Against us brats with no less confidence
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies
Or butchers killing flies.
You and your apron-men, you that stood so much
Upon the voice of occupation and
The breath of garlic eaters!
He'll shake your Rome about your ears.
As Hercules did shake down mellow fruit.
You have made fair work.
Before you find it other. All the regions
Do smilingly revolt, and who resists
Are mocked for valiant ignorance
And perish constant fools. Who is 't can blame him?
Your enemies and his find something in him.
The noble man have mercy.
The Tribunes cannot do 't for shame; the people
Deserve such pity of him as the wolf
Does of the shepherds. For his best friends, if they
Should say "Be good to Rome," they charged him
As those should do that had deserved his hate
And therein showed like enemies.
If he were putting to my house the brand
That should consume it, I have not the face
To say "Beseech you, cease."--You have made fair
You and your crafts! You have crafted fair!
How? Was 't we? We loved him, but like beasts
And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,
Who did hoot him out o' th' city.
They'll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius,
The second name of men, obeys his points
As if he were his officer. Desperation
Is all the policy, strength, and defense
That Rome can make against them.
And is Aufidius with him? You are they
That made the air unwholesome when you cast
Your stinking, greasy caps in hooting at
Coriolanus' exile. Now he's coming,
And not a hair upon a soldier's head
Which will not prove a whip. As many coxcombs
As you threw caps up will he tumble down
And pay you for your voices. 'Tis no matter.
If he could burn us all into one coal,
We have deserved it.
When I said banish him, I said 'twas pity.
You have made good work, you and your cry!--
Shall 's to the Capitol?
Go, masters, get you home. Be not dismayed.
These are a side that would be glad to have
This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,
And show no sign of fear.
Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
Would buy this for a lie.
Your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat,
Their talk at table, and their thanks at end;
And you are dark'ned in this action, sir,
Even by your own.
Unless by using means I lame the foot
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
Even to my person, than I thought he would
When first I did embrace him. Yet his nature
In that's no changeling, and I must excuse
What cannot be amended.
Joined in commission with him, but either
Have borne the action of yourself or else
To him had left it solely.
When he shall come to his account, he knows not
What I can urge against him, although it seems,
And so he thinks and is no less apparent
To th' vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly,
And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,
Fights dragonlike, and does achieve as soon
As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone
That which shall break his neck or hazard mine
Whene'er we come to our account.
Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?
All places yields to him ere he sits down,
And the nobility of Rome are his;
The Senators and Patricians love him too.
The Tribunes are no soldiers, and their people
Will be as rash in the repeal as hasty
To expel him thence. I think he'll be to Rome
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it
By sovereignty of nature. First, he was
Carry his honors even. Whether 'twas pride,
Which out of daily fortune ever taints
The happy man; whether defect of judgment,
To fail in the disposing of those chances
Which he was lord of; or whether nature,
Not to be other than one thing, not moving
From th' casque to th' cushion, but commanding
Even with the same austerity and garb
As he controlled the war; but one of these--
As he hath spices of them all--not all,
For I dare so far free him--made him feared,
So hated, and so banished. But he has a merit
To choke it in the utt'rance. So our virtues
Lie in th' interpretation of the time,
And power, unto itself most commendable,
Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair
One fire drives out one fire, one nail one nail;
Rights by rights falter; strengths by strengths do
Come, let's away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,
Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.
Tribunes), with others.]
No, I'll not go. You hear what he hath said
Which was sometime his general, who loved him
In a most dear particular. He called me father,
But what o' that? Go you that banished him;
The way into his mercy. Nay, if he coyed
To hear Cominius speak, I'll keep at home.
He would not seem to know me.
Yet one time he did call me by my name.
That we have bled together. "Coriolanus"
He would not answer to, forbade all names.
He was a kind of nothing, titleless,
Till he had forged himself a name o' th' fire
Of burning Rome.
Why, so; you have made good work!
To make coals cheap! A noble memory!
When it was less expected. He replied
It was a bare petition of a state
To one whom they had punished.
Could he say less?
For 's private friends. His answer to me was
He could not stay to pick them in a pile
Of noisome musty chaff. He said 'twas folly
For one poor grain or two to leave unburnt
And still to nose th' offense.
And this brave fellow too, we are the grains;
You are the musty chaff, and you are smelt
Above the moon. We must be burnt for you.
Nay, pray, be patient. If you refuse your aid
In this so-never-needed help, yet do not
Upbraid 's with our distress. But sure, if you
Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue,
More than the instant army we can make,
Might stop our countryman.
Only make trial what your love can do
For Rome, towards Martius.
Martius
Return me, as Cominius is returned, unheard,
What then? But as a discontented friend,
Grief-shot with his unkindness? Say 't be so?
Must have that thanks from Rome after the measure
As you intended well.
And hum at good Cominius much unhearts me.
He was not taken well; he had not dined.
The veins unfilled, our blood is cold, and then
We pout upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we have stuffed
These pipes and these conveyances of our blood
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls
Than in our priestlike fasts. Therefore I'll watch him
Till he be dieted to my request,
And then I'll set upon him.
You know the very road into his kindness
And cannot lose your way.
Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge
Of my success.	
Red as 'twould burn Rome; and his injury
The jailor to his pity. I kneeled before him;
Thus with his speechless hand. What he would do
He sent in writing after me; what he
Would not, bound with an oath to yield to his
Conditions. So that all hope is vain
Unless his noble mother and his wife,
Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him
For mercy to his country. Therefore let's hence
And with our fair entreaties haste them on.
You guard like men; 'tis well. But by your leave,
To speak with Coriolanus.
You may not pass; you must return. Our general
Will no more hear from thence.
You'll see your Rome embraced with fire before
You'll speak with Coriolanus.
If you have heard your general talk of Rome
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks
My name hath touched your ears. It is Menenius.
Be it so; go back. The virtue of your name
Is not here passable.
Thy general is my lover. I have been
The book of his good acts, whence men have read
His fame unparalleled happily amplified;
For I have ever verified my friends--
Of whom he's chief--with all the size that verity
Would without lapsing suffer. Nay, sometimes,
Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,
Have almost stamped the leasing. Therefore, fellow,
Can you, when you have pushed out your gates the
Therefore, back to Rome and prepare for
That's the utmost of your having. Back!
Guess but by my entertainment with him
Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs
Are servanted to others. Though I owe
My revenge properly, my remission lies
In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison rather
Than pity note how much. Therefore, begone.
Mine ears against your suits are stronger than
Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee,
Take this along; I writ it for thy sake,
And would have sent it. Another word, Menenius,
Was my beloved in Rome; yet thou behold'st.
For such things as you, I can scarce think
We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow
Set down our host. My partner in this action,
You must report to th' Volscian lords how plainly
You have respected, stopped your ears against
The general suit of Rome, never admitted
That thought them sure of you.
Whom with a cracked heart I have sent to Rome,
Loved me above the measure of a father,
Nay, godded me indeed. Their latest refuge
Was to send him, for whose old love I have--
Though I showed sourly to him--once more offered
The first conditions, which they did refuse
And cannot now accept, to grace him only
That thought he could do more. A very little
Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter
Will I lend ear to.	
Ha? What shout is this?
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
In the same time 'tis made? I will not.
My wife comes foremost, then the honored mold
Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand
The grandchild to her blood. But out, affection!
All bond and privilege of nature, break!
Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.	
What is that curtsy worth? Or those doves' eyes,
Which can make gods forsworn? I melt and am not
Of stronger earth than others.	
My mother bows,
As if Olympus to a molehill should
In supplication nod; and my young boy
Hath an aspect of intercession which
Great Nature cries "Deny not!" Let the Volsces
Plow Rome and harrow Italy, I'll never
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand
As if a man were author of himself,
And knew no other kin.
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.
The sorrow that delivers us thus changed
Makes you think so.
Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh,
Forgive my tyranny, but do not say
For that "Forgive our Romans."	
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss
Hath virgined it e'er since. You gods! I prate
And the most noble mother of the world
Leave unsaluted. Sink, my knee, i' th' earth;	
Of thy deep duty more impression show
Than that of common sons.
Whilst with no softer cushion than the flint
Show duty, as mistaken all this while
Between the child and parent.	
Your knees to me? To your corrected son?
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
Fillip the stars! Then let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun,
Murdering impossibility to make
What cannot be slight work.
The noble sister of Publicola,
The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle
That's curdied by the frost from purest snow
And hangs on Dian's temple!--Dear Valeria.
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Which by th' interpretation of full time
May show like all yourself.
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with nobleness, that thou mayst prove
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' th' wars
Like a great seamark standing every flaw
And saving those that eye thee.
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself
Are suitors to you.	
Or if you'd ask, remember this before:
The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my soldiers or capitulate
Again with Rome's mechanics. Tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural; desire not
Your colder reasons.
You have said you will not grant us anything;
For we have nothing else to ask but that
Which you deny already. Yet we will ask,
That if you fail in our request, the blame
May hang upon your hardness. Therefore hear us.
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark, for we'll
Hear naught from Rome in private.  Your
Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
And state of bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself
How more unfortunate than all living women
Are we come hither; since that thy sight, which
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with
Constrains them weep and shake with fear and
Making the mother, wife, and child to see
The son, the husband, and the father tearing
His country's bowels out. And to poor we
Thine enmity's most capital. Thou barr'st us
Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy. For how can we--
Alas, how can we--for our country pray,
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,
Whereto we are bound? Alack, or we must lose
The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,
Our comfort in the country. We must find
An evident calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win, for either thou
Must as a foreign recreant be led
With manacles through our streets, or else
Triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin
And bear the palm for having bravely shed
Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son,
These wars determine. If I cannot persuade thee
Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner
March to assault thy country than to tread--
Trust to 't, thou shalt not--on thy mother's womb
That brought thee to this world.
That brought you forth this boy to keep your name
Living to time.
Not of a woman's tenderness to be
Requires nor child nor woman's face to see.--
If it were so, that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn
As poisonous of your honor. No, our suit
Is that you reconcile them, while the Volsces
May say "This mercy we have showed," the Romans
Give the all-hail to thee and cry "Be blest
For making up this peace!" Thou know'st, great son,
The end of war's uncertain, but this certain,
That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name
Whose repetition will be dogged with curses,
Whose chronicle thus writ: "The man was noble,
But with his last attempt he wiped it out,
Destroyed his country, and his name remains
To th' ensuing age abhorred." Speak to me, son.
Thou hast affected the fine strains of honor
To imitate the graces of the gods,
To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' th' air
And yet to charge thy sulfur with a bolt
That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?
Think'st thou it honorable for a noble man
Still to remember wrongs?--Daughter, speak you.
He cares not for your weeping.--Speak thou, boy.
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Than can our reasons.--There's no man in the world
More bound to 's mother, yet here he lets me prate
Like one i' th' stocks. Thou hast never in thy life
Showed thy dear mother any courtesy
When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
Has clucked thee to the wars and safely home,
Loaden with honor. Say my request's unjust
And spurn me back; but if it be not so,
Thou art not honest, and the gods will plague thee
That thou restrain'st from me the duty which
To a mother's part belongs.--He turns away.--
Down, ladies! Let us shame him with our knees.
To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride
Than pity to our prayers. Down! An end.
This is the last. So, we will home to Rome
And die among our neighbors.--Nay, behold 's.
This boy that cannot tell what he would have,
But kneels and holds up hands for fellowship,
Does reason our petition with more strength
Than thou hast to deny 't.--Come, let us go.
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother,
His wife is in Corioles, and his child
Like him by chance.--Yet give us our dispatch.
And then I'll speak a little.
What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
The gods look down, and this unnatural scene
They laugh at. O, my mother, mother, O!
You have won a happy victory to Rome,
But, for your son--believe it, O, believe it!--
Most dangerously you have with him prevailed,
If not most mortal to him. But let it come.--
Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,
Were you in my stead, would you have heard
And, sir, it is no little thing to make
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,
What peace you'll make advise me. For my part,
Stand to me in this cause.--O mother!--Wife!
At difference in thee. Out of that I'll work
Myself a former fortune.
But we will drink together, and you shall bear
On like conditions, will have countersealed.
Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve
To have a temple built you. All the swords
In Italy, and her confederate arms,
Could not have made this peace.
Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with
Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with
Sir, if you'd save your life, fly to your house.
The plebeians have got your fellow tribune
And hale him up and down, all swearing if
The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,
They'll give him death by inches.
Good news, good news! The ladies have prevailed.
The Volscians are dislodged and Martius gone.
No, not th' expulsion of the Tarquins.
Art thou certain this is true? Is 't most certain?
As certain as I know the sun is fire.
Where have you lurked that you make doubt of it?
Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide
As the recomforted through th' gates. Why, hark you!
The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries, and fifes,
Tabors and cymbals, and the shouting Romans
Make the sun dance. Hark you!	
Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians
This morning for ten thousand of your throats
Sir, we have all great cause to give great thanks.
Valeria) passing over the stage, with other Lords.]
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
And make triumphant fires. Strew flowers before
Unshout the noise that banished Martius,
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother.
Cry "Welcome, ladies, welcome!"
Go tell the lords o' th' city I am here.
Deliver them this paper.	
Having read it,
Bid them repair to th' marketplace, where I,
Even in theirs and in the commons' ears,
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse
The city ports by this hath entered and
Intends t' appear before the people, hoping
To purge himself with words. Dispatch.
Most welcome!
How is it with our general?
As with a man by his own alms empoisoned
And with his charity slain.
If you do hold the same intent wherein
You wished us parties, we'll deliver you
Of your great danger.
We must proceed as we do find the people.
The people will remain uncertain whilst
Makes the survivor heir of all.
And my pretext to strike at him admits
Mine honor for his truth, who, being so heightened,
He watered his new plants with dews of flattery,
Seducing so my friends; and to this end,
He bowed his nature, never known before
But to be rough, unswayable, and free.
When he did stand for consul, which he lost
By lack of stooping--
Being banished for 't, he came unto my hearth,
Presented to my knife his throat. I took him,
Made him joint servant with me, gave him way
In all his own desires; nay, let him choose
Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,
My best and freshest men; served his designments
In mine own person; holp to reap the fame
Which he did end all his; and took some pride
To do myself this wrong; till at the last
He waged me with his countenance as if
The army marvelled at it, and, in the last,
When he had carried Rome and that we looked
For no less spoil than glory--
For which my sinews shall be stretched upon him.
At a few drops of women's rheum, which are
As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labor
Of our great action. Therefore shall he die,
And I'll renew me in his fall. But hark!
Your native town you entered like a post
And had no welcomes home, but he returns
Splitting the air with noise.
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
With giving him glory.
Ere he express himself or move the people
With what he would say, let him feel your sword,
Which we will second. When he lies along,
After your way his tale pronounced shall bury
His reasons with his body.
Here come the lords.
You are most welcome home.
But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused
What I have written to you?
What faults he made before the last, I think
Might have found easy fines, but there to end
Where he was to begin and give away
The benefit of our levies, answering us
With our own charge, making a treaty where
There was a yielding--this admits no excuse.
Commoners being with him.]
Hail, lords! I am returned your soldier,
No more infected with my country's love
Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting
Under your great command. You are to know
That prosperously I have attempted, and
With bloody passage led your wars even to
The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought
Doth more than counterpoise a full third part
The charges of the action. We have made peace
With no less honor to the Antiates
Than shame to th' Romans, and we here deliver,
Subscribed by' th' Consuls and patricians,
Together with the seal o' th' Senate, what
We have compounded on.
But tell the traitor in the highest degree
He hath abused your powers.
Ay, Martius, Caius Martius. Dost thou think
Coriolanus, in Corioles?
You lords and heads o' th' state, perfidiously
He has betrayed your business and given up
For certain drops of salt your city Rome--
Breaking his oath and resolution like
Counsel o' th' war, but at his nurse's tears
He whined and roared away your victory,
That pages blushed at him and men of heart
Looked wond'ring each at other.
Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart
Too great for what contains it. "Boy"? O slave!--
Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever
Must give this cur the lie; and his own notion--
Who wears my stripes impressed upon him, that
Must bear my beating to his grave--shall join
To thrust the lie unto him.
Cut me to pieces, Volsces. Men and lads,
Stain all your edges on me. "Boy"? False hound!
If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there
That like an eagle in a dovecote, I
Fluttered your Volscians in Corioles,
Alone I did it. "Boy"!
Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,
Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,
Marcus! He killed my father!
The man is noble, and his fame folds in
This orb o' th' Earth. His last offenses to us
Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius,
And trouble not the peace.
With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,
To use my lawful sword.
Aufidius stands on him.]
My noble masters, hear me speak.
Thou hast done a deed whereat valor will weep.
Tread not upon him.--Masters, all be quiet.--
Put up your swords.
My lords, when you shall know--as in this rage,
Provoked by him, you cannot--the great danger
Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice
That he is thus cut off. Please it your Honors
To call me to your senate, I'll deliver
Myself your loyal servant or endure
Your heaviest censure.
And mourn you for him. Let him be regarded
As the most noble corse that ever herald
Did follow to his urn.
Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.
Let's make the best of it.
And I am struck with sorrow.--Take him up.
Help, three o' th' chiefest soldiers; I'll be one.--
Beat thou the drum that it speak mournfully.--
Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he
Hath widowed and unchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the injury,
Yet he shall have a noble memory.
Assist.
He was skillful enough to have lived still, if
She derives her honesty and achieves her
Be thou blessed, Bertram, and succeed thy father
In manners as in shape. Thy blood and virtue
Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
Share with thy birthright. Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none. Be able for thine enemy
Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
Under thy own life's key Be checked for silence,
But never taxed for speech. What heaven more will,
That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down,
Fall on thy head.  Farewell, my lord.
Advise him.
Attend his love.
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
Carries no favor in 't but Bertram's.
If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one
That I should love a bright particular star
And think to wed it, he is so above me.
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
Th' ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though a plague,
To see him every hour, to sit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls
In our heart's table--heart too capable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favor.
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his relics. Who comes here?
One that goes with him. I love him for his sake,
And yet I know him a notorious liar,
Think him a great way fool, solely a coward.
Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him
That they take place when virtue's steely bones
Looks bleak i' th' cold wind. Withal, full oft we see
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.
How may we barricado it against him?
Away with 't.
Besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle, made of
Your date is better in your pie and your porridge
It was formerly better, marry, yet 'tis a withered
There shall your master have a thousand loves,
His humble ambition, proud humility,
His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
His faith, his sweet disaster, with a world
Of pretty, fond adoptious christendoms
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he--
The court's a learning place, and he is one--
That wishing well had not a body in 't
Which might be felt, that we, the poorer born,
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends
And show what we alone must think, which never
Returns us thanks.
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie
Which we ascribe to heaven. The fated sky
Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
What power is it which mounts my love so high,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
To join like likes and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their pains in sense and do suppose
What hath been cannot be. Who ever strove
To show her merit that did miss her love?
The King's disease--my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fixed and will not leave me.
The Florentines and Senoys are by th' ears,
Have fought with equal fortune, and continue
Nay, 'tis most credible. We here receive it
With caution that the Florentine will move us
For speedy aid, wherein our dearest friend
Prejudicates the business and would seem
To have us make denial.
Approved so to your Majesty, may plead
For amplest credence.
And Florence is denied before he comes.
Yet for our gentlemen that mean to see
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
To stand on either part.
For breathing and exploit.
It is the Count Rossillion, my good lord,
Young Bertram.
Frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
Hath well composed thee. Thy father's moral parts
Mayst thou inherit too. Welcome to Paris.
My thanks and duty are your Majesty's.
As when thy father and myself in friendship
First tried our soldiership. He did look far
Into the service of the time and was
Discipled of the bravest. He lasted long,
But on us both did haggish age steal on
And wore us out of act. It much repairs me
To talk of your good father. In his youth
He had the wit which I can well observe
Today in our young lords; but they may jest
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their levity in honor.
So like a courtier, contempt nor bitterness
Were in his pride or sharpness; if they were,
His equal had awaked them, and his honor,
Clock to itself, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him speak, and at this time
His tongue obeyed his hand. Who were below him
He used as creatures of another place
And bowed his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud of his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
Might be a copy to these younger times,
Which, followed well, would demonstrate them now
But goers backward.
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb.
So in approof lives not his epitaph
As in your royal speech.
Would I were with him! He would always say--
Methinks I hear him now; his plausive words
He scattered not in ears, but grafted them
To grow there and to bear. "Let me not live"--
This his good melancholy oft began
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
When it was out--"Let me not live," quoth he,
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
All but new things disdain, whose judgments are
Mere fathers of their garments, whose constancies
Expire before their fashions." This he wished.
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
To give some laborers room.
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.
Since the physician at your father's died?
He was much famed.
If he were living, I would try him yet.--
Lend me an arm.--The rest have worn me out
With several applications. Nature and sickness
Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, count.
My son's no dearer.
Isbel the woman and I will do as we may.
God till I have issue o' my body, for they say bairns
Poysam the Papist, howsome'er their hearts are
There is more owing her than is paid, and more
Love no god, that would not extend his might only
This she delivered in the most bitter touch
Even so it was with me when I was young.
Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong.
It is the show and seal of nature's truth,
Where love's strong passion is impressed in youth.
By our remembrances of days foregone,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
Her eye is sick on 't, I observe her now.
You know, Helen, I am a mother to you.
Mine honorable mistress.
Why not a mother? When I said "a mother,"
Methought you saw a serpent. What's in "mother"
That you start at it? I say I am your mother
And put you in the catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine. 'Tis often seen
Adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds
You ne'er oppressed me with a mother's groan,
Yet I express to you a mother's care.
God's mercy, maiden, does it curd thy blood
To say I am thy mother? What's the matter,
That this distempered messenger of wet,
The many-colored Iris, rounds thine eye?
Why? That you are my daughter?
The Count Rossillion cannot be my brother.
No note upon my parents, his all noble.
My master, my dear lord he is, and I
His servant live and will his vassal die.
He must not be my brother.
You are my mother, madam. Would you were--
So that my lord your son were not my brother--
Indeed my mother! Or were you both our mothers,
So I were not his sister. Can 't no other
But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?
Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law.
God shield you mean it not! "Daughter" and "mother"
So strive upon your pulse. What, pale again?
My fear hath catched your fondness! Now I see
The mystery of your loneliness and find
Your salt tears' head. Now to all sense 'tis gross:
You love my son. Invention is ashamed
Against the proclamation of thy passion
To say thou dost not. Therefore tell me true,
But tell me then 'tis so, for, look, thy cheeks
Confess it th' one to th' other, and thine eyes
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviors
That in their kind they speak it. Only sin
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue
That truth should be suspected. Speak. Is 't so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
If it be not, forswear 't; howe'er, I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
To tell me truly.
Do you love my son?
Love you my son?
Go not about. My love hath in 't a bond
Whereof the world takes note. Come, come, disclose
The state of your affection, for your passions
Have to the full appeached.
Here on my knee before high heaven and you
That before you and next unto high heaven
My friends were poor but honest; so 's my love.
Be not offended, for it hurts not him
That he is loved of me. I follow him not
By any token of presumptuous suit,
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him,
Yet never know how that desert should be.
Yet in this captious and intenible sieve
And lack not to lose still. Thus, Indian-like,
Religious in mine error, I adore
The sun that looks upon his worshipper
But knows of him no more. My dearest madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love
For loving where you do; but if yourself,
Whose aged honor cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever in so true a flame of liking
Wish chastely and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both herself and Love, O then give pity
To her whose state is such that cannot choose
But lend and give where she is sure to lose;
That seeks not to find that her search implies,
But riddle-like lives sweetly where she dies.
Had you not lately an intent--speak truly--
To go to Paris?
Tell true.
You know my father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading
And manifest experience had collected
For general sovereignty; and that he willed me
In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them
As notes whose faculties inclusive were
More than they were in note. Amongst the rest
There is a remedy, approved, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
The King is rendered lost.
This was your motive for Paris, was it? Speak.
My lord your son made me to think of this;
Else Paris, and the medicine, and the King
Had from the conversation of my thoughts
Haply been absent then.
If you should tender your supposed aid,
He would receive it? He and his physicians
Are of a mind: he that they cannot help him,
They that they cannot help. How shall they credit
Emboweled of their doctrine have left off
The danger to itself?
More than my father's skill, which was the great'st
Of his profession, that his good receipt
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
By th' luckiest stars in heaven; and would your
Honor
But give me leave to try success, I'd venture
The well-lost life of mine on his Grace's cure
By such a day, an hour.
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
Means and attendants, and my loving greetings
To those of mine in court. I'll stay at home
And pray God's blessing into thy attempt.
Be gone tomorrow, and be sure of this:
What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.
Bertram Count Rossillion, and Parolles.]
Farewell, young lords. These warlike principles
Do not throw from you.--And you, my lords,
Share the advice betwixt you. If both gain all,
The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis received
And is enough for both.
After well-entered soldiers, to return
And find your Grace in health.
No, no, it cannot be. And yet my heart
Will not confess he owes the malady
That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords.
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy Frenchmen. Let higher Italy--
Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last monarchy--see that you come
Not to woo honor but to wed it. When
The bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek,
That fame may cry you loud. I say farewell.
Health at your bidding serve your Majesty!
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them.
They say our French lack language to deny
If they demand. Beware of being captives
Before you serve.
Parolles, and other Lords come forward.]
Most admirable. I have seen those wars.
With "Too young," and "The next year," and "'Tis
An thy mind stand to 't, boy, steal away bravely.
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry
Till honor be bought up, and no sword worn
But one to dance with. By heaven, I'll steal away!
There's honor in the theft.
Good sparks and lustrous, a word, good metals.
You shall find in the regiment of the Spinii one
Captain Spurio with his cicatrice, an emblem of
Pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.
Then here's a man stands that has brought his
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.
And asked thee mercy for 't.
But, my good lord, 'tis thus: will you be cured
Of your infirmity?
No grapes, my royal fox? Yes, but you will
My noble grapes, an if my royal fox
Could reach them. I have seen a medicine
That's able to breathe life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
With sprightly fire and motion, whose simple touch
Is powerful to araise King Pippen, nay,
To give great Charlemagne a pen in 's hand
And write to her a love line.
Why, Doctor She. My lord, there's one arrived,
If you will see her. Now, by my faith and honor,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one that in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom, and constancy hath amazed me more
Than I dare blame my weakness. Will you see her--
For that is her demand--and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me.
Bring in the admiration, that we with thee
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wond'ring how thou took'st it.
And not be all day neither.
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.
This is his Majesty. Say your mind to him.
His Majesty seldom fears. I am Cressid's uncle
That dare leave two together. Fare you well.
Now, fair one, does your business follow us?
Gerard de Narbon was my father,
In what he did profess well found.
The rather will I spare my praises towards him.
Knowing him is enough. On 's bed of death
Many receipts he gave me, chiefly one
Which, as the dearest issue of his practice,
And of his old experience th' only darling,
He bade me store up as a triple eye,
Safer than mine own two, more dear. I have so,
And hearing your high Majesty is touched
With that malignant cause wherein the honor
Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power,
With all bound humbleness.
But may not be so credulous of cure,
When our most learned doctors leave us and
The congregated college have concluded
That laboring art can never ransom nature
From her inaidible estate. I say we must not
So stain our judgment or corrupt our hope
To prostitute our past-cure malady
To empirics, or to dissever so
Our great self and our credit to esteem
My duty, then, shall pay me for my pains.
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
Thou thought'st to help me, and such thanks I give
As one near death to those that wish him live.
But what at full I know, thou know'st no part,
What I can do can do no hurt to try
Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy.
He that of greatest works is finisher
Oft does them by the weakest minister.
So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown
When judges have been babes. Great floods have flown
From simple sources, and great seas have dried
When miracles have by the great'st been denied.
Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
Where most it promises, and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest and despair most shifts.
Thy pains, not used, must by thyself be paid.
Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.
Inspired merit so by breath is barred.
It is not so with Him that all things knows
As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows;
But most it is presumption in us when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavors give consent.
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
Myself against the level of mine aim,
But know I think and think I know most sure
My art is not past power nor you past cure.
Art thou so confident? Within what space
Hop'st thou my cure?
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring;
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Moist Hesperus hath quenched her sleepy lamp;
Or four and twenty times the pilot's glass
Hath told the thievish minutes, how they pass,
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free, and sickness freely die.
Upon thy certainty and confidence
What dar'st thou venture?
Traduced by odious ballads, my maiden's name
Seared otherwise; nay, worse of worst, extended
With vilest torture let my life be ended.
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound within an organ weak,
And what impossibility would slay
In common sense, sense saves another way.
Thy life is dear, for all that life can rate
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate:
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
That happiness and prime can happy call.
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
Skill infinite or monstrous desperate.
Sweet practicer, thy physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.
If I break time or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
And well deserved. Not helping, death's my fee.
But if I help, what do you promise me?
Make thy demand.
Ay, by my scepter and my hopes of heaven.
Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command.
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state;
But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.
Here is my hand. The premises observed,
Thy will by my performance shall be served.
So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
Thy resolved patient, on thee still rely.
More should I question thee, and more I must,
Though more to know could not be more to trust:
From whence thou cam'st, how tended on; but rest
Unquestioned welcome and undoubted blessed.--
Give me some help here, ho!--If thou proceed
As high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.
Tib's rush for Tom's forefinger, as a pancake for
Shrove Tuesday, a morris for May Day, as the nail
An end, sir. To your business. Give Helen this,
And urge her to a present answer back.
Commend me to my kinsmen and my son.
This is not much.
Not much employment for you. You understand me.
King, as to be--
Go, call before me all the lords in court.
Sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side,
And with this healthful hand, whose banished sense
Thou hast repealed, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promised gift,
Which but attends thy naming.
Fair maid, send forth thine eye. This youthful parcel
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
Fall when Love please! Marry, to each but one.
My mouth no more were broken than these boys'
And writ as little beard.
Not one of those but had a noble father.
Heaven hath through me restored the King to health.
We understand it and thank heaven for you.
That I protest I simply am a maid.--
Please it your Majesty, I have done already.
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me:
Let the white death sit on thy cheek forever;
We'll ne'er come there again."
Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
And to imperial Love, that god most high,
Do my sighs stream.	
Sir, will you hear my suit?
And grant it.
The honor, sir, that flames in your fair eyes
Before I speak too threat'ningly replies.
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
Her that so wishes, and her humble love.
No better, if you please.
Which great Love grant, and so I take my leave.
Be not afraid that I your hand should take.
Blessing upon your vows, and in your bed
Find fairer fortune if you ever wed.
You are too young, too happy, and too good
To make yourself a son out of my blood.
Me and my service ever whilst I live
Into your guiding power.--This is the man.
Why then, young Bertram, take her. She's thy wife.
My wife, my liege? I shall beseech your Highness
In such a business give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.
Bertram,
What she has done for me?
But never hope to know why I should marry her.
Thou know'st she has raised me from my sickly bed.
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well;
She had her breeding at my father's charge.
Rather corrupt me ever!
Of color, weight, and heat, poured all together,
Would quite confound distinction, yet stands off
In differences so mighty. If she be
All that is virtuous, save what thou dislik'st--
Of virtue for the name. But do not so.
From lowest place whence virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by th' doer's deed.
Where great additions swell 's, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honor. Good alone
Is good, without a name; vileness is so;
The property by what it is should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair;
In these to nature she's immediate heir,
And these breed honor. That is honor's scorn
Which challenges itself as honor's born
And is not like the sire. Honors thrive
When rather from our acts we them derive
Than our foregoers. The mere word's a slave
Debauched on every tomb, on every grave
Where dust and damned oblivion is the tomb
Of honored bones indeed. What should be said?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid,
Is her own dower, honor and wealth from me.
Thou wrong'st thyself if thou shouldst strive to
That you are well restored, my lord, I'm glad.
Let the rest go.
My honor's at the stake, which to defeat
Proud, scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
My love and her desert; that canst not dream
We, poising us in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know
It is in us to plant thine honor where
We please to have it grow. Check thy contempt;
Obey our will, which travails in thy good.
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims,
Or I will throw thee from my care forever
Into the staggers and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance, both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee in the name of justice
Without all terms of pity. Speak. Thine answer.
Pardon, my gracious lord, for I submit
My fancy to your eyes. When I consider
What great creation and what dole of honor
Flies where you bid it, I find that she which late
Was in my nobler thoughts most base is now
The praised of the King, who, so ennobled,
Is as 'twere born so.
And tell her she is thine, to whom I promise
Good fortune and the favor of the King
Smile upon this contract, whose ceremony
Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief
And be performed tonight. The solemn feast
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends. As thou lov'st her
Thy love's to me religious; else, does err.
You are not worth another word; else I'd call you
Undone, and forfeited to cares forever!
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
He wears his honor in a box unseen
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
Of Mars's fiery steed. To other regions!
France is a stable, we that dwell in 't jades.
Therefore, to th' war!
It shall be so. I'll send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her
And wherefore I am fled, write to the King
That which I durst not speak. His present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields
Where noble fellows strike. Wars is no strife
To the dark house and the detested wife.
Will this capriccio hold in thee? Art sure?
Go with me to my chamber, and advise me.
Why, these balls bound; there's noise in it. 'Tis hard.
Therefore away, and leave her bravely. Go.
The King has done you wrong, but hush, 'tis so.
Madam, my lord will go away tonight;
The great prerogative and rite of love,
Which as your due time claims, he does acknowledge
But puts it off to a compelled restraint,
Whose want and whose delay is strewed with sweets,
Which they distill now in the curbed time
To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
And pleasure drown the brim.
That you will take your instant leave o' th' King
And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
Strengthened with what apology you think
May make it probable need.
That, having this obtained, you presently
Attend his further pleasure.
In everything I wait upon his will.
Given order for our horses, and tonight,
When I should take possession of the bride,
End ere I do begin.
God save you, captain.
Yes, I do know him well, and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass.
Here comes my clog.
Spoke with the King and have procured his leave
For present parting. Only he desires
Some private speech with you.
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
Which holds not color with the time, nor does
The ministration and required office
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business; therefore am I found
So much unsettled. This drives me to entreat you
That presently you take your way for home,
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you;
For my respects are better than they seem,
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater than shows itself at the first view
To you that know them not.	
This to my mother.
But that I am your most obedient servant--
Come, come, no more of that.
With true observance seek to eke out that
Wherein toward me my homely stars have failed
To equal my great fortune.
My haste is very great. Farewell. Hie home.
Pray, sir, your pardon.
Nor dare I say 'tis mine--and yet it is--
But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
What law does vouch mine own.
Something, and scarce so much; nothing, indeed.
Strangers and foes do sunder and not kiss.
Where are my other men?--Monsieur, farewell.
Go thou toward home, where I will never come
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.--
Away, and for our flight.
Lords, with a troop of Soldiers.]
So that from point to point now have you heard
The fundamental reasons of this war,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth
And more thirsts after.
Upon your Grace's part, black and fearful
On the opposer.
Therefore we marvel much our cousin France
Would in so just a business shut his bosom
Against our borrowing prayers.
The reasons of our state I cannot yield
But like a common and an outward man
That the great figure of a council frames
By self-unable motion; therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
As often as I guessed.
But I am sure the younger of our nation,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
Come here for physic.
And all the honors that can fly from us
Shall on them settle. You know your places well.
When better fall, for your avails they fell.
Tomorrow to th' field.
She hath recovered the King and undone me. I have
Bertram.
This is not well, rash and unbridled boy:
To fly the favors of so good a king,
To pluck his indignation on thy head
By the misprizing of a maid too virtuous
For the contempt of empire.
Madam, my lord is gone, forever gone.
Think upon patience, pray you.--Gentlemen,
That the first face of neither on the start
Can woman me unto 't. Where is my son, I pray you?
Madam, he's gone to serve the Duke of Florence.
We met him thitherward, for thence we came,
And, after some dispatch in hand at court,
Thither we bend again.
Look on his letter, madam; here's my passport.
This is a dreadful sentence.
Brought you this letter, gentlemen?
And for the contents' sake are sorry for our pains.
If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
Thou robb'st me of a moiety. He was my son,
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my child.--Towards Florence is he?
Such is his noble purpose, and, believe 't,
The Duke will lay upon him all the honor
That good convenience claims.
Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.
Till I have no wife I have nothing in France.
Which his heart was not consenting to.
Nothing in France until he have no wife!
There's nothing here that is too good for him
But only she, and she deserves a lord
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon
And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him?
Which I have sometime known.
My son corrupts a well-derived nature
With his inducement.
The fellow has a deal of that too much
Which holds him much to have.
To tell him that his sword can never win
The honor that he loses. More I'll entreat you
Written to bear along.
In that and all your worthiest affairs.
Not so, but as we change our courtesies.
Will you draw near?
Nothing in France until he has no wife.
Thou shalt have none, Rossillion, none in France.
Then hast thou all again. Poor lord, is 't I
That chase thee from thy country and expose
Those tender limbs of thine to the event
Of the none-sparing war? And is it I
That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim; move the still-'pearing air
That sings with piercing; do not touch my lord.
Whoever shoots at him, I set him there;
Whoever charges on his forward breast,
And though I kill him not, I am the cause
His death was so effected. Better 'twere
With sharp constraint of hunger; better 'twere
That all the miseries which nature owes
Were mine at once. No, come thou home, Rossillion,
Whence honor but of danger wins a scar,
As oft it loses all. I will be gone.
My being here it is that holds thee hence.
Shall I stay here to do 't? No, no, although
The air of paradise did fan the house
And angels officed all. I will be gone,
That pitiful rumor may report my flight
To consolate thine ear. Come, night; end, day;
For with the dark, poor thief, I'll steal away.
Rossillion, Drum and Trumpets, Soldiers, Parolles.]
The general of our horse thou art, and we,
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
Upon thy promising fortune.
We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
To th' extreme edge of hazard.
And Fortune play upon thy prosperous helm
As thy auspicious mistress.
Great Mars, I put myself into thy file.
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
Alas! And would you take the letter of her?
Might you not know she would do as she has done
By sending me a letter? Read it again.
Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!
Rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much
As letting her pass so. Had I spoke with her,
Which thus she hath prevented.
If I had given you this at overnight,
She might have been o'erta'en. And yet she writes
Pursuit would be but vain.
Bless this unworthy husband? He cannot thrive
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath
Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rinaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife.
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth
That he does weigh too light. My greatest grief,
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
Dispatch the most convenient messenger.
When haply he shall hear that she is gone,
He will return; and hope I may that she,
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love. Which of them both
Is dearest to me, I have no skill in sense
To make distinction. Provide this messenger.
My heart is heavy, and mine age is weak.
Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.
Many a maid hath been seduced by them; and
Look, here comes a pilgrim. I know she will lie at
Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?
At the Saint Francis here beside the port.
Ay, marry, is 't.--Hark you, they come this way.--
If you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
But till the troops come by,
The rather for I think I know your hostess
As ample as myself.
You came I think from France?
Here you shall see a countryman of yours
That has done worthy service.
The Count Rossillion. Know you such a one?
But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him.
His face I know not.
He's bravely taken here. He stole from France,
As 'tis reported, for the King had married him
Against his liking. Think you it is so?
Ay, surely, mere the truth. I know his lady.
There is a gentleman that serves the Count
Reports but coarsely of her.
Monsieur Parolles.
In argument of praise, or to the worth
Of the great count himself, she is too mean
To have her name repeated. All her deserving
Is a reserved honesty, and that
Of a detesting lord.
Her heart weighs sadly. This young maid might do
Maybe the amorous count solicits her
In the unlawful purpose?
And brokes with all that can in such a suit
Corrupt the tender honor of a maid,
But she is armed for him and keeps her guard
In honestest defense.
The gods forbid else!
Parolles, and the whole Army.]
That is Antonio, the Duke's eldest son;
That, Escalus.
That with the plume. 'Tis a most gallant fellow.
He were much goodlier. Is 't not a handsome
That leads him to these places. Were I his lady,
That jackanapes with scarves. Why is he melancholy?
The troop is passed. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you
Where you shall host. Of enjoined penitents
There's four or five, to Great Saint Jaques bound,
Already at my house.
Please it this matron and this gentle maid
To eat with us tonight, the charge and thanking
Shall be for me. And to requite you further,
Worthy the note.
Lords, as at first.]
Here he comes.
Caesar himself could not have prevented if he had
Some dishonor we had in the loss of that
If you think your mystery in stratagem can bring
Certain it is that he will steal himself into a man's
Lordship's respect.
Lord Lafew. When his disguise and he is parted,
Now will I lead you to the house and show you
The lass I spoke of.
That's all the fault. I spoke with her but once
And found her wondrous cold. But I sent to her,
By this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
Tokens and letters, which she did re-send.
And this is all I have done. She's a fair creature.
Will you go see her?
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.
Though my estate be fall'n, I was well born,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses,
And would not put my reputation now
In any staining act.
First give me trust the Count he is my husband,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken
Is so from word to word; and then you cannot,
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
Err in bestowing it.
For you have showed me that which well approves
You're great in fortune.
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will overpay and pay again
When I have found it. The Count he woos your
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
Resolved to carry her. Let her in fine consent
As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it.
Now his important blood will naught deny
That she'll demand. A ring the County wears
That downward hath succeeded in his house
From son to son some four or five descents
Since the first father wore it. This ring he holds
In most rich choice. Yet, in his idle fire,
To buy his will it would not seem too dear,
Howe'er repented after.
Now I see the bottom of your purpose.
You see it lawful, then. It is no more
But that your daughter, ere she seems as won,
Desires this ring, appoints him an encounter,
In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
Herself most chastely absent. After,
To marry her, I'll add three thousand crowns
To what is passed already.
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With musics of all sorts and songs composed
To her unworthiness. It nothing steads us
To chide him from our eaves, for he persists
As if his life lay on 't.
Let us assay our plot, which, if it speed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed,
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact.
But let's about it.
Soldiers in ambush.]
They will say "Came you off with so little?" And
Bajazeth's mule if you prattle me into these perils.
And I shall lose my life for want of language.
If there be here German or Dane, Low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him speak to me.
The General is content to spare thee yet
And, hoodwinked as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee. Haply thou mayst inform
Something to save thy life.
And all the secrets of our camp I'll show,
Their force, their purposes. Nay, I'll speak that
Which you will wonder at.
Go tell the Count Rossillion and my brother
We have caught the woodcock and will keep him
Till we do hear from them.
He will betray us all unto ourselves.
Inform on that.
Till then I'll keep him dark and safely locked.
They told me that your name was Fontibell.
No, my good lord, Diana.
And worth it, with addition. But, fair soul,
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
You are no maiden but a monument.
When you are dead, you should be such a one
As you are now, for you are cold and stern,
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet self was got.
She then was honest.
My mother did but duty--such, my lord,
As you owe to your wife.
By love's own sweet constraint, and will forever
Do thee all rights of service.
Till we serve you. But when you have our roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves
And mock us with our bareness.
But the plain single vow that is vowed true.
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the high'st to witness. Then pray you, tell
If I should swear by Jove's great attributes
When I did love you ill? This has no holding
To swear by him whom I protest to love
That I will work against him. Therefore your oaths
Are words, and poor conditions but unsealed,
At least in my opinion.
Be not so holy-cruel. Love is holy,
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
That you do charge men with. Stand no more off,
But give thyself unto my sick desires,
Who then recovers. Say thou art mine, and ever
My love as it begins shall so persever.
That we'll forsake ourselves. Give me that ring.
To give it from me.
It is an honor 'longing to our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
In me to lose.
My chastity's the jewel of our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
In me to lose. Thus your own proper wisdom
Brings in the champion Honor on my part
Against your vain assault.
My house, mine honor, yea, my life be thine,
And I'll be bid by thee.
When midnight comes, knock at my chamber
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you have conquered my yet maiden bed,
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me.
My reasons are most strong, and you shall know them
When back again this ring shall be delivered.
And on your finger in the night I'll put
Another ring, that what in time proceeds
May token to the future our past deeds.
Adieu till then; then, fail not. You have won
For which live long to thank both heaven and me!
You may so in the end.	
My mother told me just how he would woo
As if she sat in 's heart. She says all men
Have the like oaths. He had sworn to marry me
When his wife's dead. Therefore I'll lie with him
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid,
Marry that will, I live and die a maid.
Only, in this disguise I think 't no sin
To cozen him that would unjustly win.
Will he travel higher or return again into France?
Saint Jaques le Grand, which holy undertaking
And, there residing, the tenderness of her nature
How now? Where's your master?
They cannot be too sweet for the King's tartness.
Here's his Lordship now.--How now, my lord? Is 't
What will you say without 'em?
If you pinch me like a pasty, I can say no
The rogues are marvelous poor.
Lodowick and Gratii, two hundred fifty each; mine
Paris, from whence he was whipped for getting the
Florence's camp?
Diana, to take heed of the allurement of one Count
Rossillion, a foolish idle boy, but for all that very
Parolles.
Dumaine: you have answered to his reputation
Drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be
Dumaine?
Rossillion.
Lord Lafew? I am for France.
Rossillion? An I were not a very coward, I'd compel
Yet am I thankful. If my heart were great,
But I will eat and drink, and sleep as soft
As captain shall. Simply the thing I am
Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart,
Let him fear this, for it will come to pass
That every braggart shall be found an ass.
Rust, sword; cool, blushes; and Parolles live
Safest in shame. Being fooled, by fool'ry thrive.
There's place and means for every man alive.
That you may well perceive I have not wronged you,
One of the greatest in the Christian world
Shall be my surety, 'fore whose throne 'tis needful,
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
Time was, I did him a desired office
Dear almost as his life, which gratitude
Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth
And answer thanks. I duly am informed
His Grace is at Marseilles, to which place
We have convenient convoy. You must know
My husband hies him home, where, heaven aiding
And by the leave of my good lord the King,
We'll be before our welcome.
You never had a servant to whose trust
Your business was more welcome.
Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labor
To recompense your love. Doubt not but heaven
Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower,
As it hath fated her to be my motive
And helper to a husband. But O, strange men,
That can such sweet use make of what they hate
When saucy trusting of the cozened thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night! So lust doth play
With what it loathes for that which is away.
But more of this hereafter.--You, Diana,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Something in my behalf.
Go with your impositions, I am yours
Upon your will to suffer.
But with the word "The time will bring on summer,"
When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns
And be as sweet as sharp. We must away.
Our wagon is prepared, and time revives us.
All's well that ends well. Still the fine's the crown.
Whate'er the course, the end is the renown.
But this exceeding posting day and night
Must wear your spirits low. We cannot help it.
But since you have made the days and nights as one
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold you do so grow in my requital
As nothing can unroot you.
In happy time!
This man may help me to his Majesty's ear,
If he would spend his power.--God save you, sir.
Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.
From the report that goes upon your goodness,
And therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The use of your own virtues, for the which
To give this poor petition to the King
And aid me with that store of power you have
To come into his presence.
The King's not here.
He hence removed last night, and with more haste
Than is his use.
Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.--
Marry, as I take it, to Rossillion,
Whither I am going.
Since you are like to see the King before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I presume shall render you no blame
But rather make you thank your pains for it.
Our means will make us means.
And you shall find yourself to be well thanked
Whate'er falls more. We must to horse again.--
Go, go, provide.
Lavatch, give my lord Lafew this letter. I have ere
Look, here he comes himself.--Here is a purr of
Fortune's, sir, or of Fortune's cat--but not a
There's a cardecu for you. Let the justices make
Lords, with Attendants.]
We lost a jewel of her, and our esteem
Was made much poorer by it. But your son,
As mad in folly, lacked the sense to know
Her estimation home.
And I beseech your Majesty to make it
Natural rebellion done i' th' blade of youth,
When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force,
Though my revenges were high bent upon him
And watched the time to shoot.
But first I beg my pardon: the young lord
Did to his Majesty, his mother, and his lady
Offense of mighty note, but to himself
The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife
Whose beauty did astonish the survey
Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive,
Whose dear perfection hearts that scorned to serve
Humbly called mistress.
Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither.
We are reconciled, and the first view shall kill
All repetition. Let him not ask our pardon.
The nature of his great offense is dead,
And deeper than oblivion we do bury
Th' incensing relics of it. Let him approach
So 'tis our will he should.
What says he to your daughter? Have you spoke?
All that he is hath reference to your Highness.
Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me
That sets him high in fame.
For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail
In me at once. But to the brightest beams
Distracted clouds give way. So stand thou forth.
The time is fair again.
Dear sovereign, pardon to me.
Not one word more of the consumed time.
Let's take the instant by the forward top,
For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
Th' inaudible and noiseless foot of time
Steals ere we can effect them. You remember
The daughter of this lord?
Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue;
Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
Which warped the line of every other favor,
Scorned a fair color or expressed it stol'n,
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a most hideous object. Thence it came
That she whom all men praised and whom myself,
Since I have lost, have loved, was in mine eye
The dust that did offend it.
That thou didst love her strikes some scores away
From the great compt. But love that comes too late,
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
To the great sender turns a sour offense,
Crying "That's good that's gone!" Our rash faults
Make trivial price of serious things we have,
Not knowing them until we know their grave.
Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
Destroy our friends and after weep their dust.
Our own love, waking, cries to see what's done,
While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin.
The main consents are had, and here we'll stay
To see our widower's second marriage day.
Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless,
Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!
Come on, my son, in whom my house's name
Must be digested, give a favor from you
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
That she may quickly come.
By my old beard
And ev'ry hair that's on 't, Helen that's dead
Was a sweet creature. Such a ring as this,
The last that e'er I took her leave at court,
Now, pray you, let me see it, for mine eye,
While I was speaking, oft was fastened to 't.
This ring was mine, and when I gave it Helen,
Necessitied to help, that by this token
Of what should stead her most?
Howe'er it pleases you to take it so,
The ring was never hers.
At her life's rate.
You are deceived, my lord. She never saw it.
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
Wrapped in a paper which contained the name
Of her that threw it. Noble she was, and thought
To mine own fortune and informed her fully
As she had made the overture, she ceased
In heavy satisfaction and would never
Receive the ring again.
That knows the tinct and multiplying med'cine,
Hath not in nature's mystery more science
Than I have in this ring. 'Twas mine, 'twas Helen's,
Whoever gave it you. Then if you know
That you are well acquainted with yourself,
Confess 'twas hers and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her. She called the saints to surety
That she would never put it from her finger
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed,
Where you have never come, or sent it us
Upon her great disaster.
Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honor,
And mak'st conjectural fears to come into me
Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove
That thou art so inhuman--'twill not prove so,
And yet I know not. Thou didst hate her deadly,
And she is dead, which nothing but to close
Her eyes myself could win me to believe
More than to see this ring.--Take him away.
My forepast proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
Shall tax my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly feared too little. Away with him.
We'll sift this matter further.
This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where yet she never was.	
Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not.
Here's a petition from a Florentine
Who hath for four or five removes come short
To tender it herself. I undertook it,
Vanquished thereto by the fair grace and speech
Of the poor suppliant, who, by this, I know
Is here attending. Her business looks in her
With an importing visage, and she told me,
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
Your Highness with herself.
He stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow
In you it best lies. Otherwise a seducer flourishes,
Diana Capilet.
The heavens have thought well on thee, Lafew,
To bring forth this discov'ry.--Seek these suitors.
Go speedily, and bring again the Count.
Was foully snatched.
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
Yet you desire to marry.
What woman's that?
Derived from the ancient Capilet.
My suit, as I do understand, you know
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease without your remedy.
Come hither, count. Do you know these women?
My lord, I neither can nor will deny
But that I know them. Do they charge me further?
Why do you look so strange upon your wife?
She's none of mine, my lord.
You give away this hand, and that is mine;
You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine;
You give away myself, which is known mine,
For I by vow am so embodied yours
That she which marries you must marry me,
Either both or none.
My lord, this is a fond and desp'rate creature
Whom sometime I have laughed with. Let your
Highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honor
Than for to think that I would sink it here.
Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
Till your deeds gain them. Fairer prove your honor
Than in my thought it lies.
Ask him upon his oath if he does think
He had not my virginity.
What sayst thou to her?
And was a common gamester to the camp.
He does me wrong, my lord. If I were so,
He might have bought me at a common price.
Do not believe him. O, behold this ring,
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a parallel. Yet for all that
He gave it to a commoner o' th' camp,
If I be one.
Of six preceding ancestors that gem,
Conferred by testament to th' sequent issue,
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife.
That ring's a thousand proofs.
You saw one here in court could witness it.
So bad an instrument. His name's Parolles.
Find him, and bring him hither.	
He's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
With all the spots o' th' world taxed and debauched,
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
Am I or that or this for what he'll utter,
That will speak anything?
And boarded her i' th' wanton way of youth.
She knew her distance and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancy's course
Are motives of more fancy; and in fine
Her infinite cunning with her modern grace
Subdued me to her rate. She got the ring,
And I had that which any inferior might
At market price have bought.
You that have turned off a first so noble wife
May justly diet me. I pray you yet--
Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband--
Send for your ring. I will return it home,
And give me mine again.
Sir, much like the same upon your finger.
Know you this ring? This ring was his of late.
And this was it I gave him, being abed.
The story, then, goes false you threw it him
Out of a casement?
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.
You boggle shrewdly. Every feather starts you.--
Is this the man you speak of?
Tell me, sirrah--but tell me true, I charge you,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
Which, on your just proceeding, I'll keep off--
By him and by this woman here what know you?
Therefore I will not speak what I know.
This ring you say was yours?
Where did you buy it? Or who gave it you?
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.
Who lent it you?
Where did you find it then?
If it were yours by none of all these ways,
How could you give it him?
This ring was mine. I gave it his first wife.
It might be yours or hers for aught I know.
Take her away. I do not like her now.
To prison with her, and away with him.--
Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring,
Thou diest within this hour.
Take her away.
By Jove, if ever I knew man, 'twas you.
Wherefore hast thou accused him all this while?
Because he's guilty and he is not guilty.
He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to 't.
Great king, I am no strumpet. By my life,
She does abuse our ears. To prison with her.
Good mother, fetch my bail.  Stay,
The jeweler that owes the ring is sent for,
And he shall surety me. But for this lord
Who hath abused me as he knows himself,
Though yet he never harmed me, here I quit him.
He knows himself my bed he hath defiled,
And at that time he got his wife with child.
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick.
So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick.
And now behold the meaning.
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
Is 't real that I see?
The name and not the thing.
And, look you, here's your letter. 
When from my finger you can get this ring
And are by me with child, etc. This is done.
Will you be mine now you are doubly won?
If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
If it appear not plain and prove untrue,
Deadly divorce step between me and you.--
Mine eyes smell onions. I shall weep anon.--
So, I thank thee. Wait on me home.
They are scurvy ones.
Let us from point to point this story know,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow.
Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower.
For I can guess that by thy honest aid
Thou kept'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.
Of that and all the progress more and less,
Resolvedly more leisure shall express.
All yet seems well, and if it end so meet,
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.
The King's a beggar, now the play is done.
All is well ended if this suit be won,
That you express content, which we will pay,
With strift to please you, day exceeding day.
Ours be your patience, then, and yours our parts.
Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts.
Two households, both alike in dignity
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
The fearful passage of their death-marked love
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
The which, if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
When I have fought with the men, I will be civil
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio; look upon thy death.
Or manage it to part these men with me.
What, drawn and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Have at thee, coward!	
Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
My sword, I say. Old Montague is come
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
Thou villain Capulet!--Hold me not; let me go.
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbor-stained steel--
Will they not hear?--What ho! You men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins:
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls bred of an airy word
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments
To wield old partisans in hands as old,
Cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And, Montague, come you this afternoon
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
The fiery Tybalt with his sword prepared,
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Madam, an hour before the worshiped sun
Peered forth the golden window of the east,
Where underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from this city side,
So early walking did I see your son.
Towards him I made, but he was 'ware of me
And stole into the covert of the wood.
Being one too many by my weary self),
Pursued my humor, not pursuing his,
And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs.
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the farthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Away from light steals home my heavy son
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out,
And makes himself an artificial night.
Black and portentous must this humor prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
Have you importuned him by any means?
Both by myself and many other friends.
But he, his own affections' counselor,
Is to himself--I will not say how true,
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Or dedicate his beauty to the same.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure as know.
See where he comes. So please you, step aside.
To hear true shrift.--Come, madam, let's away.
Good morrow, cousin.
But new struck nine.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
Not having that which, having, makes them short.
Out of her favor where I am in love.
Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine?--O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate,
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,
Still-waking sleep that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?
Good heart, at what?
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate to have it pressed
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs;
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears.
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
Farewell, my coz.
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
Tut, I have lost myself. I am not here.
This is not Romeo. He's some other where.
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
Groan? Why, no. But sadly tell me who.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
Well in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
And, in strong proof of chastity well armed,
From love's weak childish bow she lives uncharmed.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
For beauty, starved with her severity,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.
Be ruled by me. Forget to think of her.
By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
Examine other beauties.
To call hers, exquisite, in question more.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair.
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair;
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Where I may read who passed that passing fair?
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike, and 'tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Of honorable reckoning are you both,
And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
But saying o'er what I have said before.
My child is yet a stranger in the world.
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years.
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Younger than she are happy mothers made.
And too soon marred are those so early made.
Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
She's the hopeful lady of my earth.
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
My will to her consent is but a part.
And, she agreed, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustomed feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest
Such as I love; and you among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well-appareled April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh fennel buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
Come go with me.	
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona, find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them say
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
But I am sent to find those persons whose names
In good time!
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
One pain is lessened by another's anguish.
Turn giddy, and be helped by backward turning.
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.
Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
For what, I pray thee?
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is,
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipped and tormented, and--good e'en, good
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
Signior Martino and his wife and daughters,
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters,
The lady widow of Vitruvio,
Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces,
Mercutio and his brother Valentine,
Mine Uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters,
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia,
Signior Valentio and his cousin Tybalt,
Lucio and the lively Helena.
Indeed I should have asked thee that before.
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves,
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire;
And these who, often drowned, could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poised with herself in either eye;
But in that crystal scales let there be weighed
Your lady's love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.
Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
God forbid. Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
Madam, I am here. What is your will?
This is the matter.--Nurse, give leave awhile.
We must talk in secret.--Nurse, come back again.
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
How long is it now to Lammastide?
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she 
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
That shall she. Marry, I remember it well.
And she was weaned 
Of all the days of the year, upon that day.
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug.
To bid me trudge.
And since that time it is eleven years.
For then she could stand high-lone. Nay, by th'
She could have run and waddled all about,
For even the day before, she broke her brow,
And then my husband (God be with his soul,
He was a merry man) took up the child.
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit,
Wilt thou not, Jule?" And, by my holidam,
The pretty wretch left crying and said "Ay."
To see now how a jest shall come about!
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said "Ay."
Enough of this. I pray thee, hold thy peace.
Yes, madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh
To think it should leave crying and say "Ay."
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age,
Wilt thou not, Jule?" It stinted and said "Ay."
And stint thou, too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
Peace. I have done. God mark thee to his grace,
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed.
An I might live to see thee married once,
Marry, that "marry" is the very theme
How stands your disposition to be married?
It is an honor that I dream not of.
An honor? Were not I thine only nurse,
Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers. By my count
That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Nay, he's a flower, in faith, a very flower.
What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen.
Examine every married lineament
And see how one another lends content,
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story.
So shall you share all that he doth possess
By having him, making yourself no less.
No less? Nay, bigger. Women grow by men.
Speak briefly. Can you like of Paris' love?
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
Nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in
We follow thee.	
Juliet, the County stays.
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Maskers, Torchbearers, and a Boy with a drum.]
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without apology?
The date is out of such prolixity.
We'll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper,
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance.
But let them measure us by what they will.
We'll measure them a measure and be gone.
Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
Being but heavy I will bear the light.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
With nimble soles. I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
And soar with them above a common bound.
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.
And to sink in it should you burden love--
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.--
Give me a case to put my visage in.--
What curious eye doth cote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in
But every man betake him to his legs.
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase:
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word.
If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire--
Or, save your reverence, love--wherein thou
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Nay, that's not so.
We waste our lights; in vain, light lights by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
And we mean well in going to this masque,
But 'tis no wit to go.
Well, what was yours?
In bed asleep while they do dream things true.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomi
Over men's noses as they lie asleep.
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
Her traces of the smallest spider web,
Her collars of the moonshine's wat'ry beams,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
Her wagoner a small gray-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
On courtiers' knees, that dream on cur'sies straight;
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit.
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail,
Tickling a parson's nose as he lies asleep;
Then he dreams of another benefice.
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep, and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes
And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes.
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage.
This is she--
Thou talk'st of nothing.
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who woos
Even now the frozen bosom of the north
And, being angered, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping south.
This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night's revels, and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But he that hath the steerage of my course
Direct my sail. On, lusty gentlemen.
Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane, and, as
Cheerly, boys! Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver
Welcome, gentlemen. Ladies that have their toes
Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with
Ah, my mistresses, which of you all
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
She, I'll swear, hath corns. Am I come near you
Welcome, gentlemen. I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor and could tell
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone.
You are welcome, gentlemen.--Come, musicians,
More light, you knaves, and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire; the room is grown too hot.--
Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.--
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days.
How long is 't now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?
What, man, 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much.
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years, and then we masked.
His son is thirty.
His son was but a ward two years ago.
What lady's that which doth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear--
Beauty too rich for use, for Earth too dear.
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight,
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.--
Fetch me my rapier, boy.	
What, dares the slave
Come hither covered with an antic face
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now, by the stock and honor of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
Young Romeo is it?
Content thee, gentle coz. Let him alone.
He bears him like a portly gentleman,
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Therefore be patient. Take no note of him.
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
It fits when such a villain is a guest.
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to.
Am I the master here or you? Go to.
You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,
You'll make a mutiny among my guests,
You will set cock-a-hoop, you'll be the man!
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
You are a saucy boy. Is 't so indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
You must contrary me. Marry, 'tis time--
Well said, my hearts.--You are a princox, go.
Be quiet, or--More light, more light!--for shame,
Patience perforce with willful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this:
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
They pray: grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
Give me my sin again.	
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
What is her mother?
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
Shall have the chinks.	
Away, begone. The sport is at the best.
Ay, so I fear. The more is my unrest.
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.--
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
More torches here.--Come on then, let's to bed.--
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late.
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
The son and heir of old Tiberio.
What's he that now is going out of door?
Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
What's he that follows here, that would not dance?
Go ask his name.  If he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The only son of your great enemy.
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
That I must love a loathed enemy.
What's this? What's this?
Of one I danced withal.
Come, let's away. The strangers all are gone.
Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir.
That fair for which love groaned for and would die,
With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new beloved anywhere.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy center out.
Romeo, my cousin Romeo, Romeo!
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall.
Call, good Mercutio.
Romeo! Humors! Madman! Passion! Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh.
Speak but one rhyme and I am satisfied.
Cry but "Ay me," pronounce but "love" and
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so trim
When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.--
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.--
By her high forehead, and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us.
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjured it down.
That were some spite. My invocation
Is fair and honest. In his mistress' name,
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.--
An open-arse, thou a pop'rin pear.
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.--
Come, shall we go?
To seek him here that means not to be found.
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief
That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid since she is envious.
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
It is my lady. O, it is my love!
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those
As daylight doth a lamp; her eye in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand.
That I might touch that cheek!
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy puffing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
Deny thy father and refuse thy name,
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What's Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face. O, be some other name
Belonging to a man.
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other word would smell as sweet.
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And, for thy name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized.
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
What man art thou that, thus bescreened in night,
So stumblest on my counsel?
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongue's uttering, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.
And, but thou love me, let them find me here.
My life were better ended by their hate
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
By love, that first did prompt me to inquire.
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,
Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
Fain would I dwell on form; fain, fain deny
What I have spoke. But farewell compliment.
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say "Ay,"
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Or, if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
So thou wilt woo, but else not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou mayst think my havior light.
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Than those that have more coying to be strange.
But that thou overheard'st ere I was ware
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
What shall I swear by?
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I'll believe thee.
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say "It lightens." Sweet, good night.
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night. As sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast.
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?
Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
And yet I would it were to give again.
Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
But to be frank and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep. The more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
Anon, good nurse.--Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little; I will come again.	
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honorable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.
Tomorrow will I send.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
Hist, Romeo, hist! O, for a falc'ner's voice
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
With repetition of "My Romeo!"
It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears.
Romeo.
Shall I send to thee?
Let me stand here till thou remember it.
Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.
And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
That lets it hop a little from his hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silken thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet
That I shall say "Good night" till it be morrow.
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Would I were sleep and peace so sweet to rest.
Hence will I to my ghostly friar's close cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.
The gray-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Check'ring the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The Earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb;
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some, and yet all different.
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities.
For naught so vile that on the Earth doth live
But to the Earth some special good doth give;
Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
And vice sometime by action dignified.
Within the infant rind of this weak flower
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each
Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs--grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
Good morrow, father.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distempered head
So soon to bid "Good morrow" to thy bed.
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And, where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuffed brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art uproused with some distemp'rature,
Or, if not so, then here I hit it right:
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.
That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.
God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
That's my good son. But where hast thou been
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift.
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage. When and where and how
We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vow
That thou consent to marry us today.
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans yet ringing in mine ancient ears.
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
And bad'st me bury love.
To lay one in, another out to have.
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
The other did not so.
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me.
In one respect I'll thy assistant be,
For this alliance may so happy prove
To turn your households' rancor to pure love.
Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home tonight?
Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that
Rosaline,
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
He rests his minim rests, one, two, and the third in
Jesu, a very good blade! A very tall man! A very good
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a gray
Romeo, now art thou what thou art, by art as well as
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to
Scurvy knave, I am none of his flirt-gills; I am none
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence' cell
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
Now, God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say
Warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.
Lord, when 'twas a little prating thing--O, there is
Romeo begin both with a letter?
The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse.
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
Which ten times faster glides than the sun's beams,
Driving back shadows over louring hills.
Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw Love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me.
But old folks, many feign as they were dead,
Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Now, good sweet nurse--O Lord, why lookest thou
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily.
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I!
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak. Good, good nurse,
Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
Let me be satisfied; is 't good or bad?
Though his face be better than any man's, yet his leg
No, no. But all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? What of that?
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o' t' other side! Ah, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with jaunting up and down.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my
Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest:
Where is your mother?"
Are you so hot? Marry, come up, I trow.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Here's such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence' cell.
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks;
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church. I must another way,
To fetch a ladder by the which your love
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go. I'll to dinner. Hie you to the cell.
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
So smile the heavens upon this holy act
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not.
Amen, amen. But come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare,
It is enough I may but call her mine.
These violent delights have violent ends
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Therefore love moderately. Long love doth so.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
That idles in the wanton summer air,
And yet not fall, so light is vanity.
Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbor air, and let rich music's tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
They are but beggars that can count their worth,
But my true love is grown to such excess
Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
The day is hot, the Capels are abroad,
And if we meet we shall not 'scape a brawl,
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Thou--why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that
And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling?
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.--
Gentlemen, good e'en. A word with one of you.
An thou make minstrels of us, look to hear
We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
Or reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower.
Your Worship in that sense may call him "man."
Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
No better term than this: thou art a villain.
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me. Therefore turn and draw.
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.
And so, good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
Alla stoccato carries it away.	
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Draw, Benvolio, beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame forbear this outrage!
Tybalt! Mercutio! The Prince expressly hath
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
Tybalt stabs Mercutio.]
Is he gone and hath nothing?
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Where is my page?--Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Courage, man, the hurt cannot be much.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me.
This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
In my behalf. My reputation stained
With Tybalt's slander--Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my cousin! O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper softened valor's steel.
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
This day's black fate on more days doth depend.
This but begins the woe others must end.
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now.--
Now, Tybalt, take the "villain" back again
That late thou gavest me, for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Thou wretched boy that didst consort him here
Shalt with him hence.
Romeo, away, begone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away.
Which way ran he that killed Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
There lies that Tybalt.
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Tybalt, my cousin, O my brother's child!
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay--
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure. All this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertained revenge,
And to 't they go like lightning, for ere I
Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain,
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
He is a kinsman to the Montague.
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend.
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.
Immediately we do exile him hence.
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body and attend our will.
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging. Such a wagoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the west
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaways' eyes may wink, and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalked of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties, or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match
Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Hood my unmanned blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle till strange love grow bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night. Come, Romeo. Come, thou day in
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
Come, gentle night; come, loving black-browed
Give me my Romeo, and when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
But not possessed it, and, though I am sold,
Not yet enjoyed. So tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them.
And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.--
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? The
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?
Ah weraday, he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone.
Alack the day, he's gone, he's killed, he's dead.
Can heaven be so envious?
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo,
Whoever would have thought it? Romeo!
What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roared in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but "Ay,"
And that bare vowel "I" shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
Or those eyes shut that makes thee answer "Ay."
If he be slain, say "Ay," or if not, "No."
Brief sounds determine my weal or woe.
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood,
All in gore blood. I swooned at the sight.
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty.
Vile earth to earth resign; end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughtered and is Tybalt dead?
My dearest cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom,
For who is living if those two are gone?
Tybalt is gone and Romeo banished.
Romeo that killed him--he is banished.
It did, it did, alas the day, it did.
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant, fiend angelical!
Dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!
No faith, no honesty in men. All perjured,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me
Shame come to Romeo!
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit,
For 'tis a throne where honor may be crowned
Sole monarch of the universal Earth.
Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have killed my husband.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my
All this is comfort. Wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
That murdered me. I would forget it fain,
But, O, it presses to my memory
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
That "banished," that one word "banished,"
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Was woe enough if it had ended there;
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
And needly will be ranked with other griefs,
Why followed not, when she said "Tybalt's dead,"
Which modern lamentation might have moved?
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. "Romeo is banished."
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word's death. No words can that woe sound.
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.--
Take up those cords.
Poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled.
He made you for a highway to my bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come, cords--come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed,
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Hark you, your Romeo will be here at night.
Give this ring to my true knight
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Affliction is enamored of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity.
Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
That I yet know not?
Is my dear son with such sour company.
What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say "death,"
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death. Do not say "banishment."
Here from Verona art thou banished.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
There is no world without Verona walls
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence "banished" is "banished from the world,"
And world's exile is death. Then "banished"
Is death mistermed. Calling death "banished,"
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden ax
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind prince,
Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law
And turned that black word "death" to
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
More honorable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who even in pure and vestal modesty
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
But Romeo may not; he is banished.
Flies may do this, but I from this must fly.
They are free men, but I am banished.
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
But "banished" to kill me? "Banished"?
Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
To mangle me with that word "banished"?
Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
Yet "banished"? Hang up philosophy.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
How should they when that wise men have no eyes?
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Arise. One knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Mistlike, enfold me from the search of eyes.
Hark, how they knock!--Who's there?--Romeo,
Thou wilt be taken.--Stay awhile.--Stand up.
Run to my study.--By and by.--God's will,
What simpleness is this?--I come, I come.
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's
Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
Welcome, then.
Where's my lady's lord? Where's Romeo?
There on the ground, with his own tears made
Just in her case. O woeful sympathy!
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubb'ring.--
Stand up, stand up. Stand an you be a man.
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand.
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Ah sir, ah sir, death's the end of all.
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Doth not she think me an old murderer,
Now I have stained the childhood of our joy
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? And how doth she? And what says
My concealed lady to our canceled love?
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And "Tybalt" calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her, as that name's cursed hand
Murdered her kinsman.--O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.	
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.
Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man,
And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order,
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself,
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth,
Since birth and heaven and earth all three do meet
In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose?
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valor of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismembered with thine own defense.
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead:
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slewest Tybalt: there art thou happy.
The law that threatened death becomes thy friend
And turns it to exile: there art thou happy.
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
Thou pouts upon thy fortune and thy love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed.
Ascend her chamber. Hence and comfort her.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.--
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!--
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
How well my comfort is revived by this!
Go hence, good night--and here stands all your
Either be gone before the watch be set
Or by the break of day disguised from hence.
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell. Good night.
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Farewell.
Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
These times of woe afford no times to woo.--
Madam, good night. Commend me to your
Tonight she's mewed up to her heaviness.
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child's love. I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me. Nay, more, I doubt it not.--
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed.
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love,
And bid her--mark you me?--on Wednesday
But soft, what day is this?
Monday, ha ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
She shall be married to this noble earl.--
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
We'll keep no great ado: a friend or two.
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
Well, get you gone. O' Thursday be it, then.
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.--
Farewell, my lord.--Light to my chamber, ho!--
Afore me, it is so very late that we
May call it early by and by.--Good night.
Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear.
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain-tops.
Yond light is not daylight, I know it, I.
It is some meteor that the sun exhaled
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet. Thou need'st not to be gone.
Let me be ta'en; let me be put to death.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
Come death and welcome. Juliet wills it so.
How is 't, my soul? Let's talk. It is not day.
It is, it is. Hie hence, begone, away!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division.
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some say the lark and loathed toad changed eyes.
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day.
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
The day is broke; be wary; look about.	
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Farewell, farewell. One kiss and I'll descend.
Art thou gone so? Love, lord, ay husband, friend!
For in a minute there are many days.
Ere I again behold my Romeo.
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
For sweet discourses in our times to come.
Methinks I see thee, now thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Either my eyesight fails or thou lookest pale.
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu.	
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renowned for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long,
But send him back.
Who is 't that calls? It is my lady mother.
Is she not down so late or up so early?
What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
Why, how now, Juliet?
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.
What villain, madam?
Villain and he be many miles asunder.--
God pardon him. I do with all my heart,
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
That is because the traitor murderer lives.
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banished runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company.
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo till I behold him--dead--
Is my poor heart, so for a kinsman vexed.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it,
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him named and cannot come to him
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that hath slaughtered him.
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
And joy comes well in such a needy time.
What are they, beseech your Ladyship?
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child,
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
That thou expects not, nor I looked not for.
Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Now, by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.
When the sun sets, the earth doth drizzle dew,
But for the sunset of my brother's son
It rains downright.
How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Evermore show'ring? In one little body
Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds thy sighs,
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body.--How now, wife?
Have you delivered to her our decree?
Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks.
Soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blessed,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bride?
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
How, how, how, how? Chopped logic? What is this?
And yet "not proud"? Mistress minion you,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! Out, you baggage!
You tallow face!
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Hang thee, young baggage, disobedient wretch!
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not; reply not; do not answer me.
My fingers itch.--Wife, we scarce thought us
That God had lent us but this only child,
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, hilding.
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue.
Good Prudence, smatter with your gossips, go.
May not one speak?
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
For here we need it not.
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her matched. And having now provided
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly ligned,
Stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts,
Proportioned as one's thought would wish a man--
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
To answer "I'll not wed. I cannot love.
But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you!
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look to 't; think on 't. I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near. Lay hand on heart; advise.
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend.
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust to 't; bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
That sees into the bottom of my grief?--
Delay this marriage for a month, a week,
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
My husband is on Earth, my faith in heaven.
How shall that faith return again to Earth
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving Earth? Comfort me; counsel me.--
Alack, alack, that heaven should practice stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself.--
What sayst thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, nurse.
Romeo is banished, and all the world to nothing
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you,
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
For it excels your first, or, if it did not,
Your first is dead, or 'twere as good he were
As living here and you no use of him.
Speak'st thou from thy heart?
And from my soul too, else beshrew them both.
Well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much.
Go in and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeased my father, to Lawrence' cell
To make confession and to be absolved.
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.	
Ancient damnation, O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counselor.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
My father Capulet will have it so,
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
You say you do not know the lady's mind?
Uneven is the course. I like it not.
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
And therefore have I little talk of love,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Happily met, my lady and my wife.
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
That "may be" must be, love, on Thursday next.
What must be shall be.
Come you to make confession to this father?
To answer that, I should confess to you.
Do not deny to him that you love me.
So will you, I am sure, that you love me.
If I do so, it will be of more price
Being spoke behind your back than to your face.
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
The tears have got small victory by that,
For it was bad enough before their spite.
Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.
It may be so, for it is not mine own.--
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Or shall I come to you at evening Mass?
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.--
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
God shield I should disturb devotion!--
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse you.
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.	
Come weep with me, past hope, past care, past help.
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
On Thursday next be married to this County.
Tell me not, friar, that thou hearest of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
God joined my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's sealed,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Therefore out of thy long-experienced time
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honor bring.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
Hold, daughter, I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
That cop'st with death himself to 'scape from it;
And if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.
From off the battlements of any tower,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears,
Or hide me nightly in a charnel house,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.
Hold, then. Go home; be merry; give consent
To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow.
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;
Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilling liquor drink thou off;
When presently through all thy veins shall run
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.
No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest.
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
Like death when he shuts up the day of life.
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Then, as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
Abate thy valor in the acting it.
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Hold, get you gone. Be strong and prosperous
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
To Mantua with my letters to thy lord.
Love give me strength, and strength shall help
Farewell, dear father.
So many guests invite as here are writ.
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.--
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
How now, my headstrong, where have you been
Where I have learned me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoined
By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here	
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you.
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Why, I am glad on 't. This is well. Stand up.
This is as 't should be.--Let me see the County.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.--
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
All our whole city is much bound to him.
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Go, nurse. Go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.
We shall be short in our provision.
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Go thou to Juliet. Help to deck up her.
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare up him
Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed.
Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle nurse,
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.
What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
No, madam, we have culled such necessaries
As are behooveful for our state tomorrow.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the Nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
In this so sudden business.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
Farewell.--God knows when we shall meet again.
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
Nurse!--What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.	
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
What if it be a poison which the Friar
Subtly hath ministered to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored
Because he married me before to Romeo?
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point.
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place--
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packed;
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort--
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad--
Environed with all these hideous fears,
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud,
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash out my desp'rate brains?
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body
Upon a rapier's point! Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here's drink. I drink to
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed.
The curfew bell hath rung. 'Tis three o'clock.--
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica.
Spare not for cost.
Get you to bed. Faith, you'll be sick tomorrow
For this night's watching.
No, not a whit. What, I have watched ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time,
But I will watch you from such watching now.
Now fellow,
What is there?
Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.
Make haste, make haste.	
Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Mass, and well said. A merry whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be loggerhead.
Good faith, 'tis day.
The County will be here with music straight,
For so he said he would. I hear him near.--
Nurse!--Wife! What ho!--What, nurse, I say!
Go waken Juliet. Go and trim her up.
Make haste. The bridegroom he is come already.
Make haste, I say.
Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet!--Fast, I warrant
Why, lamb, why, lady! Fie, you slugabed!
Why, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Why, bride!--
What, not a word?--You take your pennyworths
Sleep for a week, for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little.--God forgive me,
Marry, and amen! How sound is she asleep!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed,
He'll fright you up, i' faith.--Will it not be?
What, dressed, and in your clothes, and down
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead.--
Some aqua vitae, ho!--My lord! My lady!
What noise is here?
What is the matter?
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.
Help, help! Call help.
For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.
She's dead, deceased. She's dead, alack the day!
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead.
Ha, let me see her! Out, alas, she's cold.
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Musicians.]
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Ready to go, but never to return.--
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law; Death is my heir.
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In lasting labor of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catched it from my sight!
Most lamentable day, most woeful day
That ever, ever I did yet behold!
Never was seen so black a day as this!
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Most detestable death, by thee beguiled,
By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown!
Despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed!
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
Dead art thou! Alack, my child is dead,
And with my child my joys are buried.
Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion,
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced;
And weep you now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
She's not well married that lives married long,
But she's best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
And in her best array, bear her to church,
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
All things that we ordained festival
Turn from their office to black funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him,
And go, Sir Paris. Everyone prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill.
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
Answer me like men.
Why "silver sound"? Why "music with her silver
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
And all this day an unaccustomed spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips
That I revived and was an emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love itself possessed
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the Friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How doth my Juliet? That I ask again,
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
Then she is well and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleeps in Capels' monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
And presently took post to tell it you.
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Is it e'en so?--Then I deny you, stars!--
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses. I will hence tonight.
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
Some misadventure.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the Friar?
No, my good lord.
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men.
In tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples. Meager were his looks.
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones.
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuffed, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Were thinly scattered to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him."
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.--
What ho, Apothecary!
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
As will disperse itself through all the veins,
That the life-weary taker may fall dead,
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
As violently as hasty powder fired
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them.
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law.
The world affords no law to make thee rich.
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.
My poverty, but not my will, consents.
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not
Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet's grave, for there must I use thee.
Holy Franciscan friar, brother, ho!
This same should be the voice of Friar John.--
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Going to find a barefoot brother out,
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Sealed up the doors and would not let us forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence.
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Unto my cell.
Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.	
Now must I to the monument alone.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents.
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
Give me thy torch, boy. Hence and stand aloof.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew trees lay thee all along,
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground.
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me
As signal that thou hearest something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee. Go.
Here in the churchyard. Yet I will adventure.
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way tonight,
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
In dear employment. Therefore hence, begone.
But, if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
In what I farther shall intend to do,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.
For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
This is that banished haughty Montague
That murdered my love's cousin, with which grief
It is supposed the fair creature died,
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague.
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Obey and go with me, for thou must die.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone.
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head
By urging me to fury. O, begone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
For I come hither armed against myself.
Stay not, begone, live, and hereafter say
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
Open the tomb; lay me with Juliet.	
In faith, I will.--Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so?--O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.--
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred.
How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry, which their keepers call
Call this a light'ning?--O my love, my wife,
Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Thou art not conquered. Beauty's ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.--
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin.--Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh! Eyes, look your last.
Arms, take your last embrace. And, lips, O, you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavory guide!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
Here's to my love.  O true apothecary,
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
Saint Francis be my speed! How oft tonight
Have my old feet stumbled at graves!--Who's there?
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Bliss be upon you. Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
It burneth in the Capels' monument.
It doth so, holy sir, and there's my master,
One that you love.
How long hath he been there?
Go with me to the vault.
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death
If I did stay to look on his intents.
Stay, then. I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
And that my master slew him.
Romeo!--
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulcher?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolored by this place of peace?
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
And steeped in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
The lady stirs.
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead,
And Paris, too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
What's here? A cup closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.--
To help me after! I will kiss thy lips.
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make me die with a restorative.	
Thy lips are warm!
Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O, happy dagger,
This is thy sheath. There rust, and let me die.
This is the place, there where the torch doth burn.
The ground is bloody.--Search about the
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find, attach.
Pitiful sight! Here lies the County slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain this two days buried.--
Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets.
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.
Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
As he was coming from this churchyard's side.
What misadventure is so early up
That calls our person from our morning rest?
What should it be that is so shrieked abroad?
Some "Juliet," and some "Paris," and all run
With open outcry toward our monument.
What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,
And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new killed.
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder
Here is a friar, and slaughtered Romeo's man,
With instruments upon them fit to open
These dead men's tombs.
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom.
That warns my old age to a sepulcher.
Come, Montague, for thou art early up
To see thy son and heir now early down.
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight.
Grief of my son's exile hath stopped her breath.
What further woe conspires against mine age?
To press before thy father to a grave?
Seal up the mouth of outrage for awhile,
Till we can clear these ambiguities
And know their spring, their head, their true
And then will I be general of your woes
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.--
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me, of this direful murder.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excused.
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
Banished the new-made bridegroom from this city,
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betrothed and would have married her perforce
To County Paris. Then comes she to me,
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her 
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
That he should hither come as this dire night
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stayed by accident, and yesternight
Returned my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault,
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awakening, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes, and I entreated her come forth
And bear this work of heaven with patience.
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
And she, too desperate, would not go with me
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know, and to the marriage
Her nurse is privy. And if aught in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificed some hour before his time
Unto the rigor of severest law.
We still have known thee for a holy man.--
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say to this?
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
If I departed not and left him there.
Give me the letter. I will look on it.--
Where is the County's page, that raised the
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,
And by and by my master drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the watch.
This letter doth make good the Friar's words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies?--Capulet, Montague,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love,
And I, for winking at your discords too,
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Can I demand.
For I will ray her statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity.
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Go hence to have more talk of these sad things.
Some shall be pardoned, and some punished.
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
That bear a weighty and a serious brow,
Sad, high, and working, full of state and woe,
Such noble scenes as draw the eye to flow,
We now present. Those that can pity here
May, if they think it well, let fall a tear;
The subject will deserve it. Such as give
Their money out of hope they may believe
May here find truth too. Those that come to see
Only a show or two, and so agree
The play may pass, if they be still and willing,
Richly in two short hours. Only they
That come to hear a merry, bawdy play,
In a long motley coat guarded with yellow,
Will be deceived. For, gentle hearers, know
To rank our chosen truth with such a show
As fool and fight is, besides forfeiting
Our own brains and the opinion that we bring
To make that only true we now intend,
Will leave us never an understanding friend.
Therefore, for goodness' sake, and as you are known
The first and happiest hearers of the town,
Be sad, as we would make you. Think you see
The very persons of our noble story
As they were living. Think you see them great,
And followed with the general throng and sweat
Of thousand friends. Then, in a moment, see
How soon this mightiness meets misery.
And if you can be merry then, I'll say
Duke of Buckingham and the Lord Abergavenny.]
Good morrow, and well met. How have you done
Since last we saw in France?
Healthful, and ever since a fresh admirer
Of what I saw there.
Stayed me a prisoner in my chamber when
Those suns of glory, those two lights of men,
Met in the vale of Andren.
Beheld them when they lighted, how they clung
In their embracement, as they grew together--
Which had they, what four throned ones could have
Such a compounded one?
The view of earthly glory. Men might say
Till this time pomp was single, but now married
To one above itself. Each following day
Became the next day's master, till the last
Made former wonders its. Today the French,
All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
Shone down the English, and tomorrow they
Made Britain India: every man that stood
Showed like a mine. Their dwarfish pages were
As cherubins, all gilt. The madams too,
Not used to toil, did almost sweat to bear
The pride upon them, that their very labor
Was to them as a painting. Now this masque
Was cried incomparable; and th' ensuing night
Made it a fool and beggar. The two kings,
Equal in luster, were now best, now worst,
As presence did present them: him in eye
Still him in praise; and being present both,
Durst wag his tongue in censure. When these suns--
For so they phrase 'em--by their heralds challenged
The noble spirits to arms, they did perform
Beyond thought's compass, that former fabulous story,
Being now seen possible enough, got credit
That Bevis was believed.
As I belong to worship, and affect
In honor honesty, the tract of everything
Would by a good discourser lose some life
Which action's self was tongue to. All was royal;
To the disposing of it naught rebelled.
Order gave each thing view. The office did
Distinctly his full function.
Of this great sport together, as you guess?
One, certes, that promises no element
In such a business.
All this was ordered by the good discretion
Of the right reverend Cardinal of York.
The devil speed him! No man's pie is freed
From his ambitious finger. What had he
To do in these fierce vanities? I wonder
That such a keech can with his very bulk
Take up the rays o' th' beneficial sun
And keep it from the Earth.
There's in him stuff that puts him to these ends;
For, being not propped by ancestry, whose grace
Chalks successors their way, nor called upon
For high feats done to th' crown, neither allied
To eminent assistants, but spiderlike,
Out of his self-drawing web, he gives us note
The force of his own merit makes his way--
What heaven hath given him--let some graver eye
Pierce into that--but I can see his pride
Peep through each part of him. Whence has he that?
If not from hell, the devil is a niggard,
Or has given all before, and he begins
Upon this French going-out, took he upon him,
Without the privity o' th' King, t' appoint
Who should attend on him? He makes up the file
Of all the gentry, for the most part such
To whom as great a charge as little honor
He meant to lay upon; and his own letter,
The honorable board of council out,
Must fetch him in he papers.
Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have
By this so sickened their estates that never
They shall abound as formerly.
Have broke their backs with laying manors on 'em
For this great journey. What did this vanity
But minister communication of
The peace between the French and us not values
The cost that did conclude it.
After the hideous storm that followed, was
Into a general prophecy: that this tempest,
Dashing the garment of this peace, aboded
The sudden breach on 't.
For France hath flawed the league and hath attached
Our merchants' goods at Bordeaux.
Th' ambassador is silenced?
At a superfluous rate!
Our reverend cardinal carried.
The state takes notice of the private difference
Betwixt you and the Cardinal. I advise you--
And take it from a heart that wishes towards you
Honor and plenteous safety--that you read
The Cardinal's malice and his potency
Together; to consider further that
What his high hatred would effect wants not
That he's revengeful, and I know his sword
Hath a sharp edge; it's long, and 't may be said
It reaches far, and where 'twill not extend,
Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel;
You'll find it wholesome. Lo where comes that rock
That I advise your shunning.
The Cardinal in his passage fixeth his eye on Buckingham,
The Duke of Buckingham's surveyor, ha?
Where's his examination?
Is he in person ready?
Well, we shall then know more, and Buckingham
Shall lessen this big look.
This butcher's cur is venomed-mouthed, and I
Have not the power to muzzle him; therefore best
Not wake him in his slumber. A beggar's book
Outworths a noble's blood.
Ask God for temp'rance. That's th' appliance only
Which your disease requires.
Matter against me, and his eye reviled
Me as his abject object. At this instant
He bores me with some trick. He's gone to th' King.
And let your reason with your choler question
What 'tis you go about. To climb steep hills
Requires slow pace at first. Anger is like
Self-mettle tires him. Not a man in England
Can advise me like you; be to yourself
As you would to your friend.
And from a mouth of honor quite cry down
This Ipswich fellow's insolence, or proclaim
There's difference in no persons.
Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot
That it do singe yourself. We may outrun
By violent swiftness that which we run at
And lose by overrunning. Know you not
The fire that mounts the liquor till 't run o'er
In seeming to augment it wastes it? Be advised.
More stronger to direct you than yourself,
If with the sap of reason you would quench
Or but allay the fire of passion.
By your prescription. But this top-proud fellow--
Whom from the flow of gall I name not, but
From sincere motions--by intelligence,
And proofs as clear as founts in July when
We see each grain of gravel, I do know
To be corrupt and treasonous.
To th' King I'll say 't, and make my vouch as strong
As shore of rock. Attend. This holy fox,
Or wolf, or both--for he is equal rav'nous
As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief
As able to perform 't, his mind and place
Infecting one another, yea reciprocally--
Only to show his pomp as well in France
As here at home, suggests the King our master
To this last costly treaty, th' interview
That swallowed so much treasure and like a glass
Did break i' th' rinsing.
Pray give me favor, sir. This cunning cardinal
The articles o' th' combination drew
As himself pleased; and they were ratified
As he cried "Thus let be," to as much end
As give a crutch to th' dead. But our Count Cardinal
Has done this, and 'tis well, for worthy Wolsey,
Who cannot err, he did it. Now this follows--
Which, as I take it, is a kind of puppy
To th' old dam treason: Charles the Emperor,
Under pretense to see the Queen his aunt--
For 'twas indeed his color, but he came
To whisper Wolsey--here makes visitation;
His fears were that the interview betwixt
England and France might through their amity
Breed him some prejudice, for from this league
Peeped harms that menaced him; privily
Deals with our cardinal and, as I trow--
Which I do well, for I am sure the Emperor
Paid ere he promised, whereby his suit was granted
Ere it was asked. But when the way was made
And paved with gold, the Emperor thus desired
That he would please to alter the King's course
And break the foresaid peace. Let the King know--
As soon he shall by me--that thus the Cardinal
Does buy and sell his honor as he pleases
And for his own advantage.
To hear this of him, and could wish he were
Something mistaken in 't.
He shall appear in proof.
Your office, Sergeant: execute it.
My lord the Duke of Buckingham and Earl
Of Hertford, Stafford, and Northampton, I
Arrest thee of high treason, in the name
Of our most sovereign king.
The net has fall'n upon me. I shall perish
Under device and practice.
To see you ta'en from liberty, to look on
The business present. 'Tis his Highness' pleasure
You shall to th' Tower.
To plead mine innocence, for that dye is on me
Which makes my whit'st part black. The will of heaven
Be done in this and all things. I obey.
Nay, he must bear you company.--The King
Is pleased you shall to th' Tower, till you know
How he determines further.
The will of heaven be done, and the King's pleasure
By me obeyed.
The King t' attach Lord Mountacute, and the bodies
Of the Duke's confessor, John de la Car,
One Gilbert Peck, his counselor--
These are the limbs o' th' plot. No more, I hope.
My surveyor is false. The o'ergreat cardinal
Hath showed him gold. My life is spanned already.
Whose figure even this instant cloud puts on
By dark'ning my clear sun.  My lord,
Attendants, including a Secretary of the Cardinal.
The Cardinal places himself under the King's feet on
My life itself, and the best heart of it,
Thanks you for this great care. I stood i' th' level
Of a full-charged confederacy, and give thanks
To you that choked it.--Let be called before us
That gentleman of Buckingham's; in person
And point by point the treasons of his master
He shall again relate.
Queen Katherine, ushered by the Duke of Norfolk, and
Nay, we must longer kneel; I am a suitor.
Arise, and take place by us.
Half your suit
Never name to us; you have half our power.
The other moiety ere you ask is given;
Repeat your will, and take it.
That you would love yourself, and in that love
Not unconsidered leave your honor nor
The dignity of your office, is the point
Of my petition.
And those of true condition, that your subjects
Are in great grievance. There have been commissions
Sent down among 'em which hath flawed the heart
Of all their loyalties, wherein, although
My good Lord Cardinal, they vent reproaches
Most bitterly on you as putter-on
Of these exactions, yet the King our master,
Whose honor heaven shield from soil, even he
Language unmannerly--yea, such which breaks
The sides of loyalty and almost appears
In loud rebellion.
It doth appear. For, upon these taxations,
The clothiers all, not able to maintain
The many to them longing, have put off
The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers, who,
Unfit for other life, compelled by hunger
And lack of other means, in desperate manner
Daring th' event to th' teeth, are all in uproar,
And danger serves among them.
Wherein? And what taxation? My Lord Cardinal,
You that are blamed for it alike with us,
Know you of this taxation?
Pertains to th' state, and front but in that file
Where others tell steps with me.
You know no more than others? But you frame
Things that are known alike, which are not wholesome
To those which would not know them, and yet must
Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions
Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are
Most pestilent to th' hearing, and to bear 'em
The back is sacrifice to th' load. They say
They are devised by you, or else you suffer
Too hard an exclamation.
The nature of it? In what kind, let's know,
Is this exaction?
In tempting of your patience, but am boldened
Under your promised pardon. The subjects' grief
Comes through commissions which compels from
The sixth part of his substance, to be levied
Without delay, and the pretense for this
Is named your wars in France. This makes bold
Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze
Allegiance in them. Their curses now
Live where their prayers did; and it's come to pass
This tractable obedience is a slave
To each incensed will. I would your Highness
Would give it quick consideration, for
There is no primer baseness.
This is against our pleasure.
By learned approbation of the judges. If I am
Traduced by ignorant tongues, which neither know
My faculties nor person, yet will be
The chronicles of my doing, let me say
That virtue must go through. We must not stint
Our necessary actions in the fear
To cope malicious censurers, which ever,
As ravenous fishes, do a vessel follow
That is new trimmed, but benefit no further
Than vainly longing. What we oft do best,
By sick interpreters, once weak ones, is
Not ours or not allowed; what worst, as oft,
Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up
For our best act. If we shall stand still
In fear our motion will be mocked or carped at,
We should take root here where we sit,
Or sit state-statues only.
And with a care, exempt themselves from fear;
Things done without example, in their issue
Are to be feared. Have you a precedent
Of this commission? I believe, not any.
We must not rend our subjects from our laws
And stick them in our will. Sixth part of each?
From every tree lop, bark, and part o' th' timber,
And though we leave it with a root, thus hacked,
The air will drink the sap. To every county
Where this is questioned send our letters with
Free pardon to each man that has denied
The force of this commission. Pray look to 't;
Let there be letters writ to every shire
Of the King's grace and pardon. The grieved commons
Hardly conceive of me. Let it be noised
That through our intercession this revokement
And pardon comes. I shall anon advise you
Further in the proceeding.	
Is run in your displeasure.
The gentleman is learned and a most rare speaker;
To nature none more bound; his training such
That he may furnish and instruct great teachers
And never seek for aid out of himself. Yet see,
When these so noble benefits shall prove
Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt,
They turn to vicious forms ten times more ugly
Than ever they were fair. This man so complete,
Who was enrolled 'mongst wonders, and when we
Almost with ravished list'ning could not find
His hour of speech a minute--he, my lady,
Hath into monstrous habits put the graces
That once were his, and is become as black
As if besmeared in hell. Sit by us. You shall hear--
This was his gentleman in trust--of him
Things to strike honor sad.--Bid him recount
The fore-recited practices, whereof
We cannot feel too little, hear too much.
Stand forth, and with bold spirit relate what you
Most like a careful subject have collected
Out of the Duke of Buckingham.
First, it was usual with him--every day
It would infect his speech--that if the King
Should without issue die, he'll carry it so
To make the scepter his. These very words
Lord Abergavenny, to whom by oath he menaced
Revenge upon the Cardinal.
This dangerous conception in this point:
Not friended by his wish to your high person,
His will is most malignant, and it stretches
Beyond you to your friends.
Deliver all with charity.
How grounded he his title to the crown
Upon our fail? To this point hast thou heard him
At any time speak aught?
By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Henton.
What was that Henton?
His confessor, who fed him every minute
With words of sovereignty.
Not long before your Highness sped to France,
The Duke being at the Rose, within the parish
Saint Laurence Poultney, did of me demand
What was the speech among the Londoners
Concerning the French journey. I replied
Men fear the French would prove perfidious,
To the King's danger. Presently the Duke
Said 'twas the fear indeed, and that he doubted
Spoke by a holy monk "that oft," says he,
John de la Car, my chaplain, a choice hour
To hear from him a matter of some moment;
Whom after under the confession's seal
He solemnly had sworn that what he spoke
My chaplain to no creature living but
To me should utter, with demure confidence
This pausingly ensued: 'Neither the King, nor 's heirs--
Tell you the Duke--shall prosper. Bid him strive
To gain the love o' th' commonalty; the Duke
Shall govern England.'"
You were the Duke's surveyor, and lost your office
On the complaint o' th' tenants. Take good heed
You charge not in your spleen a noble person
And spoil your nobler soul. I say, take heed--
Yes, heartily beseech you.
Go forward.
The monk might be deceived, and that 'twas dangerous
For him to ruminate on this so far until
It forged him some design, which, being believed,
It was much like to do. He answered "Tush,
It can do me no damage," adding further
That had the King in his last sickness failed,
The Cardinal's and Sir Thomas Lovell's heads
Should have gone off.
There's mischief in this man! Canst thou say further?
After your Highness had reproved the Duke
About Sir William Blumer--
The Duke retained him his. But on. What hence?
As to the Tower, I thought, "I would have played
The part my father meant to act upon
Th' usurper Richard, who, being at Salisbury,
Made suit to come in 's presence; which if granted,
As he made semblance of his duty, would
Have put his knife into him."
Now, madam, may his Highness live in freedom
And this man out of prison?
There's something more would out of thee. What sayst?
After "the Duke his father" with "the knife,"
He stretched him, and with one hand on his dagger,
Another spread on 's breast, mounting his eyes,
He did discharge a horrible oath whose tenor
Was, were he evil used, he would outgo
His father by as much as a performance
Does an irresolute purpose.
To sheathe his knife in us! He is attached.
Call him to present trial. If he may
Find mercy in the law, 'tis his; if none,
Let him not seek 't of us. By day and night,
He's traitor to th' height!
Is 't possible the spells of France should juggle
Men into such strange mysteries?
Though they be never so ridiculous--
Nay, let 'em be unmanly--yet are followed.
As far as I see, all the good our English
Have got by the late voyage is but merely
For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly
Their very noses had been counselors
To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so.
They have all new legs and lame ones; one would
That never see 'em pace before, the spavin
Or springhalt reigned among 'em.
Their clothes are after such a pagan cut to 't,
That, sure, they've worn out Christendom.
How now?
What news, Sir Thomas Lovell?
That's clapped upon the court gate.
The reformation of our traveled gallants
That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors.
To think an English courtier may be wise
And never see the Louvre.
For so run the conditions--leave those remnants
Of fool and feather that they got in France,
With all their honorable points of ignorance
Pertaining thereunto, as fights and fireworks,
Abusing better men than they can be
Out of a foreign wisdom, renouncing clean
The faith they have in tennis and tall stockings,
Short blistered breeches, and those types of travel,
And understand again like honest men,
Or pack to their old playfellows. There, I take it,
They may cum privilegio "oui" away
The lag end of their lewdness and be laughed at.
Are grown so catching.
Will have of these trim vanities!
There will be woe indeed, lords. The sly whoresons
Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies.
The devil fiddle 'em! I am glad they are going,
For sure there's no converting of 'em. Now
An honest country lord, as I am, beaten
And have an hour of hearing, and, by 'r Lady,
Held current music too.
Your colt's tooth is not cast yet?
Nor shall not while I have a stump.
Whither were you a-going?
Your Lordship is a guest too.
This night he makes a supper, and a great one,
To many lords and ladies. There will be
The beauty of this kingdom, I'll assure you.
That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed,
His dews fall everywhere.
He had a black mouth that said other of him.
He may, my lord. 'Has wherewithal. In him,
Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine.
Men of his way should be most liberal;
They are set here for examples.
But few now give so great ones. My barge stays.
Your Lordship shall along.--Come, good Sir Thomas,
We shall be late else, which I would not be,
For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guilford
This night to be comptrollers.
Ladies, a general welcome from his Grace
Salutes you all. This night he dedicates
To fair content and you. None here, he hopes,
In all this noble bevy has brought with her
One care abroad. He would have all as merry
As, first, good company, good wine, good welcome
Can make good people.
Sir Thomas Lovell.]
The very thought of this fair company
Clapped wings to me.
Sir Thomas Lovell, had the Cardinal
But half my lay thoughts in him, some of these
Should find a running banquet, ere they rested,
They are a sweet society of fair ones.
To one or two of these!
They should find easy penance.
As easy as a down bed would afford it.
Sweet ladies, will it please you sit?--Sir Harry,
Place you that side; I'll take the charge of this.
His Grace is ent'ring. Nay, you must not freeze;
Two women placed together makes cold weather.
My Lord Sands, you are one will keep 'em waking.
Pray sit between these ladies.
And thank your Lordship.--By your leave, sweet ladies.
If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me;
But he would bite none. Just as I do now,
He would kiss you twenty with a breath.
So, now you're fairly seated, gentlemen,
The penance lies on you if these fair ladies
Pass away frowning.
Let me alone.
Servants, and takes his state.]
You're welcome, my fair guests. That noble lady
Or gentleman that is not freely merry
Is not my friend. This to confirm my welcome,
And to you all good health.	
Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks
And save me so much talking.
Ladies, you are not merry.--Gentlemen,
Whose fault is this?
In their fair cheeks, my lord. Then we shall have 'em
Talk us to silence.
My Lord Sands.
Here's to your Ladyship, and pledge it, madam,
For 'tis to such a thing--
Look out there, some of you.	
And to what end, is this?--Nay, ladies, fear not.
By all the laws of war you're privileged.
How now, what is 't?
For so they seem. They've left their barge and landed,
And hither make, as great ambassadors
From foreign princes.
Go, give 'em welcome--you can speak the French
And pray receive 'em nobly, and conduct 'em
Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty
Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.
You have now a broken banquet, but we'll mend it.
They pass directly before the Cardinal and gracefully
Because they speak no English, thus they prayed
To tell your Grace: that, having heard by fame
Of this so noble and so fair assembly
This night to meet here, they could do no less,
Out of the great respect they bear to beauty,
But leave their flocks and, under your fair conduct,
Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat
An hour of revels with 'em.
They have done my poor house grace, for which I
King chooses Anne Bullen.]
The fairest hand I ever touched! O beauty,
Till now I never knew thee.
My lord!
There should be one amongst 'em by his person
More worthy this place than myself, to whom,
If I but knew him, with my love and duty
What say they?
There is indeed, which they would have your Grace
Find out, and he will take it.
By all your good leaves, gentlemen.
Here I'll make
My royal choice.
You hold a fair assembly; you do well, lord.
You are a churchman, or I'll tell you, cardinal,
Your Grace is grown so pleasant.
Prithee come hither. What fair lady's that?
An 't please your Grace, Sir Thomas Bullen's daughter,
The Viscount Rochford, one of her Highness' women.
By heaven, she is a dainty one.--Sweetheart,
And not to kiss you.  A health,
Let it go round.	
Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready
In the next chamber.
Lead in your ladies ev'ry one.--Sweet partner,
Good my Lord Cardinal. I have half a dozen healths
To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure
To lead 'em once again, and then let's dream
Who's best in favor. Let the music knock it.
Whither away so fast?
Of the great Duke of Buckingham.
That labor, sir. All's now done but the ceremony
Of bringing back the prisoner.
Yes, indeed was I.
You may guess quickly what.
Yes, truly, is he, and condemned upon 't.
Came to the bar, where to his accusations
He pleaded still not guilty and alleged
Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.
The King's attorney on the contrary
Urged on the examinations, proofs, confessions
Of divers witnesses, which the Duke desired
To him brought viva voce to his face;
At which appeared against him his surveyor,
Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor, and John Car,
Confessor to him, with that devil monk,
Hopkins, that made this mischief.
That fed him with his prophecies?
All these accused him strongly, which he fain
Would have flung from him, but indeed he could not.
And so his peers upon this evidence
Have found him guilty of high treason. Much
He spoke, and learnedly, for life, but all
Was either pitied in him or forgotten.
After all this, how did he bear himself?
When he was brought again to th' bar to hear
His knell rung out, his judgment, he was stirred
With such an agony he sweat extremely
And something spoke in choler, ill and hasty.
But he fell to himself again, and sweetly
In all the rest showed a most noble patience.
He never was so womanish. The cause
He may a little grieve at.
The Cardinal is the end of this.
By all conjectures; first, Kildare's attainder,
Then Deputy of Ireland, who, removed,
Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too,
Lest he should help his father.
Was a deep envious one.
No doubt he will requite it. This is noted,
And generally: whoever the King favors,
The Card'nal instantly will find employment,
And far enough from court too.
Hate him perniciously and, o' my conscience,
Wish him ten fathom deep. This duke as much
They love and dote on, call him bounteous
Buckingham,
The mirror of all courtesy.
And see the noble ruined man you speak of.
Vaux, Sir Walter Sands, and Common People, etc.]
Let's stand close and behold him.
You that thus far have come to pity me,
Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.
And by that name must die. Yet heaven bear witness,
And if I have a conscience, let it sink me
Even as the ax falls, if I be not faithful!
The law I bear no malice for my death;
But those that sought it I could wish more Christian.
Be what they will, I heartily forgive 'em.
Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief,
Nor build their evils on the graves of great men,
For then my guiltless blood must cry against 'em.
For further life in this world I ne'er hope,
Nor will I sue, although the King have mercies
More than I dare make faults. You few that loved me
And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,
His noble friends and fellows, whom to leave
Is only bitter to him, only dying,
Go with me like good angels to my end,
And as the long divorce of steel falls on me,
Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice,
And lift my soul to heaven.--Lead on, a' God's name.
If ever any malice in your heart
Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.
Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you
As I would be forgiven. I forgive all.
There cannot be those numberless offenses
Shall make my grave. Commend me to his Grace.
And if he speak of Buckingham, pray tell him
You met him half in heaven. My vows and prayers
Yet are the King's and, till my soul forsake,
Shall cry for blessings on him. May he live
Longer than I have time to tell his years.
Ever beloved and loving may his rule be;
And when old Time shall lead him to his end,
Goodness and he fill up one monument!
To th' waterside I must conduct your Grace,
Then give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux,
Who undertakes you to your end.
The Duke is coming. See the barge be ready,
And fit it with such furniture as suits
The greatness of his person.
Let it alone. My state now will but mock me.
When I came hither, I was Lord High Constable
And Duke of Buckingham; now, poor Edward Bohun.
Yet I am richer than my base accusers,
That never knew what truth meant. I now seal it,
And with that blood will make 'em one day groan for 't.
My noble father, Henry of Buckingham,
Who first raised head against usurping Richard,
Flying for succor to his servant Banister,
Being distressed, was by that wretch betrayed,
And, without trial, fell. God's peace be with him.
Henry the Seventh, succeeding, truly pitying
My father's loss, like a most royal prince
Restored me to my honors and out of ruins
Made my name once more noble. Now his son,
Henry the Eighth, life, honor, name, and all
That made me happy at one stroke has taken
Forever from the world. I had my trial,
And must needs say a noble one, which makes me
Yet thus far we are one in fortunes: both
Fell by our servants, by those men we loved most--
Heaven has an end in all; yet, you that hear me,
This from a dying man receive as certain:
Where you are liberal of your loves and counsels
Be sure you be not loose; for those you make friends
And give your hearts to, when they once perceive
The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
Like water from you, never found again
But where they mean to sink you. All good people,
Pray for me. I must now forsake you. The last hour
Of my long weary life is come upon me.
Farewell. And when you would say something that
Speak how I fell. I have done; and God forgive me.
That were the authors.
Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,
Greater than this.
What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?
This secret is so weighty 'twill require
You shall, sir. Did you not of late days hear
Between the King and Katherine?
For when the King once heard it, out of anger
He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight
To stop the rumor and allay those tongues
That durst disperse it.
Is found a truth now, for it grows again
Fresher than e'er it was, and held for certain
The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinal,
Or some about him near, have, out of malice
To the good queen, possessed him with a scruple
That will undo her. To confirm this too,
Cardinal Campeius is arrived, and lately,
As all think, for this business.
And merely to revenge him on the Emperor
For not bestowing on him at his asking
The archbishopric of Toledo this is purposed.
That she should feel the smart of this? The Cardinal
Will have his will, and she must fall.
We are too open here to argue this.
Let's think in private more.
He will have all, I think.
How is the King employed?
Full of sad thoughts and troubles.
It seems the marriage with his brother's wife
Has crept too near his conscience.
Has crept too near another lady.
This is the Cardinal's doing. The king-cardinal,
That blind priest, like the eldest son of Fortune,
Turns what he list. The King will know him one day.
Pray God he do! He'll never know himself else.
How holily he works in all his business,
And with what zeal! For, now he has cracked the
Between us and the Emperor, the Queen's
He dives into the King's soul and there scatters
Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience,
Fears and despairs--and all these for his marriage.
And out of all these to restore the King,
He counsels a divorce, a loss of her
That like a jewel has hung twenty years
About his neck, yet never lost her luster;
Of her that loves him with that excellence
That angels love good men with; even of her
That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls,
Will bless the King. And is not this course pious?
Heaven keep me from such counsel! 'Tis most true:
These news are everywhere, every tongue speaks 'em,
And every true heart weeps for 't. All that dare
Look into these affairs see this main end,
The French king's sister. Heaven will one day open
The King's eyes, that so long have slept upon
This bold bad man.
And heartily, for our deliverance,
Or this imperious man will work us all
From princes into pages. All men's honors
Lie like one lump before him, to be fashioned
Into what pitch he please.
As I am made without him, so I'll stand,
If the King please. His curses and his blessings
Touch me alike: they're breath I not believe in.
To him that made him proud, the Pope.
And with some other business put the King
From these sad thoughts that work too much upon
My lord, you'll bear us company?
The King has sent me otherwhere. Besides,
You'll find a most unfit time to disturb him.
Health to your Lordships.
Chamberlain.
How sad he looks! Sure he is much afflicted.
Who's there? Ha?
Who's there, I say? How dare you thrust yourselves
Into my private meditations? Who am I, ha?
Malice ne'er meant. Our breach of duty this way
Is business of estate, in which we come
To know your royal pleasure.
Go to; I'll make you know your times of business.
Is this an hour for temporal affairs, ha?
Who's there? My good Lord Cardinal? O my Wolsey,
The quiet of my wounded conscience,
Thou art a cure fit for a king.  You're
Most learned reverend sir, into our kingdom.
Use us and it.--My good lord, have great care
Of private conference.
This priest has no pride in him?
But this cannot continue.
Your Grace has given a precedent of wisdom
Above all princes in committing freely
Your scruple to the voice of Christendom.
Who can be angry now? What envy reach you?
The Spaniard, tied by blood and favor to her,
Must now confess, if they have any goodness,
The trial just and noble; all the clerks--
Have their free voices; Rome, the nurse of judgment,
Invited by your noble self, hath sent
One general tongue unto us, this good man,
This just and learned priest, Cardinal Campeius,
Whom once more I present unto your Highness.
And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,
And thank the holy conclave for their loves.
They have sent me such a man I would have wished
Your Grace must needs deserve all strangers' loves,
You are so noble. To your Highness' hand
The court of Rome commanding, you, my Lord
Cardinal of York, are joined with me their servant
In the unpartial judging of this business.
Two equal men. The Queen shall be acquainted
Forthwith for what you come. Where's Gardiner?
So dear in heart not to deny her that
Scholars allowed freely to argue for her.
Ay, and the best she shall have, and my favor
To him that does best. God forbid else. Cardinal,
Prithee call Gardiner to me, my new secretary.
Give me your hand. Much joy and favor to you.
You are the King's now.
Forever by your Grace, whose hand has raised me.
My lord of York, was not one Doctor Pace
In this man's place before him?
Was he not held a learned man?
Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread, then,
Even of yourself, Lord Cardinal.
They will not stick to say you envied him
And, fearing he would rise--he was so virtuous--
Kept him a foreign man still, which so grieved him
That he ran mad and died.
That's Christian care enough. For living murmurers,
There's places of rebuke. He was a fool,
For he would needs be virtuous. That good fellow
If I command him follows my appointment.
We live not to be griped by meaner persons.
Deliver this with modesty to th' Queen.
The most convenient place that I can think of
For such receipt of learning is Blackfriars.
There you shall meet about this weighty business.
My Wolsey, see it furnished. O, my lord,
Would it not grieve an able man to leave
So sweet a bedfellow? But, conscience, conscience!
Not for that neither. Here's the pang that pinches:
His Highness having lived so long with her, and she
So good a lady that no tongue could ever
Pronounce dishonor of her--by my life,
She never knew harm-doing!--O, now, after
So many courses of the sun enthroned,
Still growing in a majesty and pomp, the which
To leave a thousandfold more bitter than
To give her the avaunt! It is a pity
Would move a monster.
Melt and lament for her.
She ne'er had known pomp; though 't be temporal,
Yet if that quarrel, Fortune, do divorce
It from the bearer, 'tis a sufferance panging
As soul and body's severing.
She's a stranger now again!
Must pity drop upon her. Verily,
And range with humble livers in content
Than to be perked up in a glist'ring grief
And wear a golden sorrow.
Is our best having.
And venture maidenhead for 't; and so would you,
For all this spice of your hypocrisy.
You, that have so fair parts of woman on you,
Have too a woman's heart, which ever yet
Affected eminence, wealth, sovereignty;
Which, to say sooth, are blessings; and which gifts,
Saving your mincing, the capacity
Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive
If you might please to stretch it.
Yes, troth, and troth. You would not be a queen?
No, not for all the riches under heaven.
Old as I am, to queen it. But I pray you,
What think you of a duchess? Have you limbs
To bear that load of title?
Then you are weakly made. Pluck off a little.
For more than blushing comes to. If your back
Cannot vouchsafe this burden, 'tis too weak
Ever to get a boy.
For all the world.
You'd venture an emballing. I myself
Would for Carnarvanshire, although there longed
No more to th' crown but that. Lo, who comes here?
Good morrow, ladies. What were 't worth to know
The secret of your conference?
Not your demand; it values not your asking.
Our mistress' sorrows we were pitying.
It was a gentle business, and becoming
The action of good women. There is hope
All will be well.
You bear a gentle mind, and heav'nly blessings
Follow such creatures. That you may, fair lady,
Perceive I speak sincerely, and high note's
Ta'en of your many virtues, the King's Majesty
Commends his good opinion of you to you, and
Does purpose honor to you no less flowing
Than Marchioness of Pembroke, to which title
Out of his grace he adds.
What kind of my obedience I should tender.
More than my all is nothing, nor my prayers
Are not words duly hallowed, nor my wishes
More worth than empty vanities. Yet prayers and
Are all I can return. 'Beseech your Lordship,
Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience,
As from a blushing handmaid, to his Highness,
Whose health and royalty I pray for.
The King hath of you.  I have perused her
Beauty and honor in her are so mingled
That they have caught the King. And who knows yet
But from this lady may proceed a gem
To lighten all this isle?--I'll to the King
And say I spoke with you.
Am yet a courtier beggarly, nor could
Come pat betwixt too early and too late
For any suit of pounds; and you--O, fate!--
This compelled fortune!--have your mouth filled up
Before you open it.
How tastes it? Is it bitter? Forty pence, no.
There was a lady once--'tis an old story--
That would not be a queen, that would she not,
For all the mud in Egypt. Have you heard it?
Come, you are pleasant.
No other obligation? By my life,
That promises more thousands; honor's train
Is longer than his foreskirt. By this time
Are you not stronger than you were?
Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy,
And leave me out on 't. Would I had no being
If this salute my blood a jot. It faints me
To think what follows.
The Queen is comfortless and we forgetful
In our long absence. Pray do not deliver
What here you've heard to her.
Asaph; next them, with some small distance, follows a
Gentleman bearing the purse with the great seal, and a
Gentlemen, bearing two great silver pillars. After them,
Queen takes place some distance from the King. The
Bishops place themselves on each side the court, in
Lords sit next the Bishops. The rest of the Attendants
Whilst our commission from Rome is read,
Let silence be commanded.
It hath already publicly been read,
And on all sides th' authority allowed.
You may then spare that time.
Sir, I desire you do me right and justice,
And to bestow your pity on me; for
Born out of your dominions, having here
No judge indifferent nor no more assurance
Of equal friendship and proceeding. Alas, sir,
In what have I offended you? What cause
Hath my behavior given to your displeasure
That thus you should proceed to put me off
And take your good grace from me? Heaven witness
At all times to your will conformable,
Ever in fear to kindle your dislike,
Yea, subject to your countenance, glad or sorry
As I saw it inclined. When was the hour
Or made it not mine too? Or which of your friends
Have I not strove to love, although I knew
He were mine enemy? What friend of mine
That had to him derived your anger did I
Continue in my liking? Nay, gave notice
He was from thence discharged? Sir, call to mind
That I have been your wife in this obedience
Upward of twenty years, and have been blessed
With many children by you. If, in the course
And process of this time, you can report,
And prove it too, against mine honor aught,
My bond to wedlock or my love and duty
Against your sacred person, in God's name
Turn me away and let the foul'st contempt
Shut door upon me, and so give me up
To the sharp'st kind of justice. Please you, sir,
The King your father was reputed for
And unmatched wit and judgment. Ferdinand,
My father, King of Spain, was reckoned one
The wisest prince that there had reigned by many
That they had gathered a wise council to them
Of every realm, that did debate this business,
Who deemed our marriage lawful. Wherefore I humbly
Beseech you, sir, to spare me till I may
Be by my friends in Spain advised, whose counsel
Your pleasure be fulfilled.
And of your choice, these reverend fathers, men
Of singular integrity and learning,
Yea, the elect o' th' land, who are assembled
To plead your cause. It shall be therefore bootless
That longer you desire the court, as well
For your own quiet as to rectify
What is unsettled in the King.
Hath spoken well and justly. Therefore, madam,
It's fit this royal session do proceed
And that without delay their arguments
Be now produced and heard.
To you I speak.
We are a queen, or long have dreamed so, certain
The daughter of a king, my drops of tears
Or God will punish me. I do believe,
Induced by potent circumstances, that
You are mine enemy, and make my challenge
You shall not be my judge; for it is you
Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me--
Which God's dew quench! Therefore I say again,
Refuse you for my judge, whom, yet once more,
At all a friend to truth.
You speak not like yourself, who ever yet
Have stood to charity and displayed th' effects
Of disposition gentle and of wisdom
For you or any. How far I have proceeded,
Or how far further shall, is warranted
By a commission from the Consistory,
Yea, the whole Consistory of Rome. You charge me
That I "have blown this coal." I do deny it.
The King is present. If it be known to him
That I gainsay my deed, how may he wound,
And worthily, my falsehood, yea, as much
As you have done my truth. If he know
That I am free of your report, he knows
It lies to cure me, and the cure is to
Remove these thoughts from you, the which before
His Highness shall speak in, I do beseech
You, gracious madam, to unthink your speaking
And to say so no more.
You sign your place and calling, in full seeming,
With meekness and humility, but your heart
Is crammed with arrogancy, spleen, and pride.
You have by fortune and his Highness' favors
Gone slightly o'er low steps, and now are mounted
Where powers are your retainers, and your words,
Domestics to you, serve your will as 't please
Yourself pronounce their office. I must tell you,
You tender more your person's honor than
Your high profession spiritual, that again
Before you all, appeal unto the Pope
To bring my whole cause 'fore his Holiness,
And to be judged by him.
Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and
Disdainful to be tried by 't. 'Tis not well.
She's going away.
What need you note it? Pray you, keep your way.
When you are called, return. Now, the Lord help!
They vex me past my patience. Pray you, pass on.
Upon this business my appearance make
In any of their courts.
That man i' th' world who shall report he has
For speaking false in that. Thou art, alone--
If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,
Thy meekness saintlike, wifelike government,
Obeying in commanding, and thy parts
Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out--
The queen of earthly queens. She's noble born,
And like her true nobility she has
Carried herself towards me.
In humblest manner I require your Highness
That it shall please you to declare in hearing
Of all these ears--for where I am robbed and bound,
There must I be unloosed, although not there
At once and fully satisfied--whether ever I
Did broach this business to your Highness, or
Laid any scruple in your way which might
Induce you to the question on 't, or ever
Have to you, but with thanks to God for such
Be to the prejudice of her present state,
Or touch of her good person?
That you have many enemies that know not
Why they are so but, like to village curs,
Bark when their fellows do. By some of these
The Queen is put in anger. You're excused.
But will you be more justified? You ever
Have wished the sleeping of this business, never
It to be stirred, but oft have hindered, oft,
The passages made toward it. On my honor
And thus far clear him. Now, what moved me to 't,
Then mark th' inducement. Thus it came; give heed
My conscience first received a tenderness,
Scruple, and prick on certain speeches uttered
By th' Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador,
Who had been hither sent on the debating
Our daughter Mary. I' th' progress of this business,
Ere a determinate resolution, he,
Wherein he might the King his lord advertise
Whether our daughter were legitimate,
Respecting this our marriage with the dowager,
Sometime our brother's wife. This respite shook
The bosom of my conscience, entered me,
Yea, with a spitting power, and made to tremble
The region of my breast; which forced such way
That many mazed considerings did throng
And pressed in with this caution. First, methought
Commanded nature that my lady's womb,
If it conceived a male child by me, should
Do no more offices of life to 't than
The grave does to th' dead, for her male issue
Or died where they were made, or shortly after
This world had aired them. Hence I took a thought
This was a judgment on me, that my kingdom,
Well worthy the best heir o' th' world, should not
Be gladded in 't by me. Then follows that
By this my issue's fail, and that gave to me
Many a groaning throe. Thus hulling in
The wild sea of my conscience, I did steer
Toward this remedy whereupon we are
Now present here together. That's to say,
By all the reverend fathers of the land
And doctors learned. First, I began in private
With you, my Lord of Lincoln. You remember
How under my oppression I did reek
When I first moved you.
How far you satisfied me.
The question did at first so stagger me,
Bearing a state of mighty moment in 't
And consequence of dread, that I committed
The daring'st counsel which I had to doubt,
And did entreat your Highness to this course
Which you are running here.
My Lord of Canterbury, and got your leave
To make this present summons. Unsolicited
But by particular consent proceeded
Under your hands and seals. Therefore go on,
For no dislike i' th' world against the person
Of the good queen, but the sharp thorny points
Of my alleged reasons drives this forward.
Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life
And kingly dignity, we are contented
To wear our mortal state to come with her,
Katherine our queen, before the primest creature
That's paragoned o' th' world.
The Queen being absent, 'tis a needful fitness
That we adjourn this court till further day.
Meanwhile must be an earnest motion
Made to the Queen to call back her appeal
She intends unto his Holiness.
These cardinals trifle with me. I abhor
This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome.
My learned and well-beloved servant Cranmer,
Prithee return. With thy approach, I know,
My comfort comes along.--Break up the court.
Take thy lute, wench. My soul grows sad with troubles.
Sing, and disperse 'em if thou canst. Leave working.
An 't please your Grace, the two great cardinals
Wait in the presence.
They willed me say so, madam.
To come near.	
What can be their business
With me, a poor weak woman, fall'n from favor?
They should be good men, their affairs as righteous.
But all hoods make not monks.
Your Graces find me here part of a housewife;
What are your pleasures with me, reverend lords?
May it please you, noble madam, to withdraw
Into your private chamber, we shall give you
The full cause of our coming.
There's nothing I have done yet, o' my conscience,
Deserves a corner. Would all other women
Could speak this with as free a soul as I do.
My lords, I care not, so much I am happy
Above a number, if my actions
Were tried by ev'ry tongue, ev'ry eye saw 'em,
Envy and base opinion set against 'em,
Seek me out, and that way I am wife in,
Out with it boldly. Truth loves open dealing.
As not to know the language I have lived in.
Pray speak in English. Here are some will thank you,
If you speak truth, for their poor mistress' sake.
Believe me, she has had much wrong. Lord Cardinal,
The willing'st sin I ever yet committed
May be absolved in English.
And service to his Majesty and you--
So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant.
We come not by the way of accusation,
To taint that honor every good tongue blesses,
Nor to betray you any way to sorrow--
You have too much, good lady--but to know
How you stand minded in the weighty difference
Between the King and you, and to deliver,
Like free and honest men, our just opinions
And comforts to your cause.
My Lord of York, out of his noble nature,
Zeal, and obedience he still bore your Grace,
Forgetting, like a good man, your late censure
Both of his truth and him--which was too far--
Offers, as I do, in a sign of peace,
His service and his counsel.
My lords, I thank you both for your good wills.
You speak like honest men; pray God you prove so.
But how to make you suddenly an answer
In such a point of weight, so near mine honor--
More near my life, I fear--with my weak wit,
And to such men of gravity and learning,
In truth I know not. I was set at work
Among my maids, full little, God knows, looking
Either for such men or such business.
For her sake that I have been--for I feel
The last fit of my greatness--good your Graces,
Let me have time and counsel for my cause.
Alas, I am a woman friendless, hopeless.
Madam, you wrong the King's love with these fears;
Your hopes and friends are infinite.
But little for my profit. Can you think, lords,
That any Englishman dare give me counsel,
Or be a known friend, 'gainst his Highness' pleasure,
Though he be grown so desperate to be honest,
And live a subject? Nay, forsooth. My friends,
They that must weigh out my afflictions,
They that my trust must grow to, live not here.
They are, as all my other comforts, far hence
In mine own country, lords.
Would leave your griefs and take my counsel.
Put your main cause into the King's protection.
He's loving and most gracious. 'Twill be much
Both for your honor better and your cause,
For if the trial of the law o'ertake you,
You'll part away disgraced.
You tell me what you wish for both: my ruin.
Is this your Christian counsel? Out upon you!
Heaven is above all yet; there sits a judge
That no king can corrupt.
The more shame for you! Holy men I thought you,
Upon my soul, two reverend cardinal virtues;
But cardinal sins and hollow hearts I fear you.
Mend 'em, for shame, my lords. Is this your comfort?
The cordial that you bring a wretched lady,
Take heed, for heaven's sake, take heed, lest at once
The burden of my sorrows fall upon you.
Madam, this is a mere distraction.
You turn the good we offer into envy.
You turn me into nothing! Woe upon you
And all such false professors. Would you have me--
If you have any justice, any pity,
If you be anything but churchmen's habits--
Put my sick cause into his hands that hates me?
Alas, has banished me his bed already,
His love, too, long ago. I am old, my lords,
And all the fellowship I hold now with him
Is only my obedience. What can happen
To me above this wretchedness? All your studies
Make me a curse like this.
Have I lived thus long--let me speak myself,
Since virtue finds no friends--a wife, a true one--
Never yet branded with suspicion--
Have I with all my full affections
Still met the King, loved him next heav'n, obeyed him,
Been, out of fondness, superstitious to him,
Almost forgot my prayers to content him,
And am I thus rewarded? 'Tis not well, lords.
Bring me a constant woman to her husband,
One that ne'er dreamed a joy beyond his pleasure,
And to that woman, when she has done most,
Yet will I add an honor: a great patience.
Madam, you wander from the good we aim at.
My lord, I dare not make myself so guilty
To give up willingly that noble title
Your master wed me to. Nothing but death
Shall e'er divorce my dignities.
Would I had never trod this English earth
Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it!
You have angels' faces, but heaven knows your hearts.
What will become of me now, wretched lady?
Shipwracked upon a kingdom where no pity,
No friends, no hope, no kindred weep for me,
Almost no grave allowed me, like the lily
That once was mistress of the field and flourished,
Could but be brought to know our ends are honest,
You'd feel more comfort. Why should we, good lady,
Upon what cause, wrong you? Alas, our places,
The way of our profession, is against it.
We are to cure such sorrows, not to sow 'em.
For goodness' sake, consider what you do,
How you may hurt yourself, ay, utterly
Grow from the King's acquaintance by this carriage.
The hearts of princes kiss obedience,
So much they love it. But to stubborn spirits
They swell and grow as terrible as storms.
Those we profess: peacemakers, friends, and servants.
Madam, you'll find it so. You wrong your virtues
With these weak women's fears. A noble spirit,
As yours was put into you, ever casts
Such doubts, as false coin, from it. The King loves
Beware you lose it not. For us, if you please
To trust us in your business, we are ready
To use our utmost studies in your service.
Do what you will, my lords, and pray forgive me
If I have used myself unmannerly.
You know I am a woman, lacking wit
To make a seemly answer to such persons.
Pray do my service to his Majesty.
He has my heart yet and shall have my prayers
While I shall have my life. Come, reverend fathers,
Bestow your counsels on me. She now begs
That little thought, when she set footing here,
She should have bought her dignities so dear.
If you will now unite in your complaints
And force them with a constancy, the Cardinal
Cannot stand under them. If you omit
The offer of this time, I cannot promise
But that you shall sustain more new disgraces
With these you bear already.
To meet the least occasion that may give me
Remembrance of my father-in-law the Duke,
To be revenged on him.
Have uncontemned gone by him, or at least
Strangely neglected? When did he regard
The stamp of nobleness in any person
Out of himself?
What he deserves of you and me I know;
What we can do to him--though now the time
Gives way to us--I much fear. If you cannot
Bar his access to th' King, never attempt
Anything on him, for he hath a witchcraft
Over the King in 's tongue.
His spell in that is out. The King hath found
Matter against him that forever mars
The honey of his language. No, he's settled,
Not to come off, in his displeasure.
Once every hour.
In the divorce his contrary proceedings
Are all unfolded, wherein he appears
As I would wish mine enemy.
His practices to light?
The Cardinal's letters to the Pope miscarried
And came to th' eye o' th' King, wherein was read
How that the Cardinal did entreat his Holiness
To stay the judgment o' th' divorce; for if
It did take place, "I do," quoth he, "perceive
My king is tangled in affection to
Has the King this?
The King in this perceives him how he coasts
And hedges his own way. But in this point
All his tricks founder, and he brings his physic
After his patient's death: the King already
Hath married the fair lady.
May you be happy in your wish, my lord,
For I profess you have it.
Trace the conjunction!
There's order given for her coronation.
Marry, this is yet but young and may be left
To some ears unrecounted. But, my lords,
She is a gallant creature and complete
In mind and feature. I persuade me, from her
Will fall some blessing to this land which shall
In it be memorized.
Digest this letter of the Cardinal's?
The Lord forbid!
There be more wasps that buzz about his nose
Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius
Is stol'n away to Rome, hath ta'en no leave,
Has left the cause o' th' King unhandled, and
Is posted as the agent of our cardinal
To second all his plot. I do assure you
The King cried "Ha!" at this.
And let him cry "Ha!" louder.
When returns Cranmer?
He is returned in his opinions, which
Have satisfied the King for his divorce,
Together with all famous colleges
Almost in Christendom. Shortly, I believe,
His second marriage shall be published, and
Her coronation. Katherine no more
Shall be called queen, but princess dowager
And widow to Prince Arthur.
In the King's business.
For it an archbishop.
The Cardinal!
Observe, observe; he's moody.	
Gave 't you the King?
Looked he o' th' inside of the paper?
He did unseal them, and the first he viewed,
He did it with a serious mind; a heed
Was in his countenance. You he bade
Attend him here this morning.
To come abroad?
The French king's sister; he shall marry her.
Anne Bullen? No, I'll no Anne Bullens for him.
There's more in 't than fair visage. Bullen?
No, we'll no Bullens. Speedily I wish
To hear from Rome. The Marchioness of Pembroke!
He's discontented.
Does whet his anger to him.
Lord, for thy justice!
The late queen's gentlewoman, a knight's daughter,
To be her mistress' mistress? The Queen's queen?
This candle burns not clear. 'Tis I must snuff it;
Then out it goes. What though I know her virtuous
And well-deserving? Yet I know her for
Our cause that she should lie i' th' bosom of
Our hard-ruled king. Again, there is sprung up
An heretic, an arch-one, Cranmer, one
Hath crawled into the favor of the King
And is his oracle.
The master-cord on 's heart.
What piles of wealth hath he accumulated
To his own portion! And what expense by th' hour
Seems to flow from him! How i' th' name of thrift
Does he rake this together?  Now,
Saw you the Cardinal?
Stood here observing him. Some strange commotion
Is in his brain. He bites his lip, and starts,
Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
Then lays his finger on his temple, straight
Springs out into fast gait, then stops again,
Strikes his breast hard, and anon he casts
His eye against the moon. In most strange postures
We have seen him set himself.
There is a mutiny in 's mind. This morning
Papers of state he sent me to peruse,
As I required, and wot you what I found?
There--on my conscience, put unwittingly--
Forsooth, an inventory, thus importing
The several parcels of his plate, his treasure,
Rich stuffs and ornaments of household, which
Possession of a subject.
Some spirit put this paper in the packet
To bless your eye withal.
His contemplation were above the Earth
And fixed on spiritual object, he should still
Dwell in his musings, but I am afraid
His thinkings are below the moon, not worth
His serious considering.
Ever God bless your Highness.
You are full of heavenly stuff and bear the inventory
Of your best graces in your mind, the which
You were now running o'er. You have scarce time
To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span
To keep your earthly audit. Sure, in that
To have you therein my companion.
For holy offices I have a time; a time
To think upon the part of business which
Her times of preservation, which perforce
Must give my tendance to.
And ever may your Highness yoke together,
As I will lend you cause, my doing well
With my well saying.
And 'tis a kind of good deed to say well.
And yet words are no deeds. My father loved you;
He said he did, and with his deed did crown
His word upon you. Since I had my office
Employed you where high profits might come home,
But pared my present havings to bestow
My bounties upon you.
The Lord increase this business!
The prime man of the state? I pray you tell me
If what I now pronounce you have found true;
And, if you may confess it, say withal
If you are bound to us or no. What say you?
My sovereign, I confess your royal graces,
Showered on me daily, have been more than could
My studied purposes requite, which went
Beyond all man's endeavors. My endeavors
Have ever come too short of my desires,
Yet filed with my abilities. Mine own ends
Have been mine so, that evermore they pointed
To th' good of your most sacred person and
The profit of the state. For your great graces
Heaped upon me, poor undeserver, I
Can nothing render but allegiant thanks,
My prayers to heaven for you, my loyalty,
Which ever has and ever shall be growing
Till death--that winter--kill it.
Therein illustrated. The honor of it
Does pay the act of it, as, i' th' contrary,
The foulness is the punishment. I presume
That, as my hand has opened bounty to you,
My heart dropped love, my power rained honor, more
On you than any, so your hand and heart,
Your brain, and every function of your power
Should--notwithstanding that your bond of duty
As 'twere in love's particular--be more
To me, your friend, than any.
That for your Highness' good I ever labored
More than mine own, that am, have, and will be--
Though all the world should crack their duty to you
And throw it from their soul, though perils did
Abound as thick as thought could make 'em, and
Appear in forms more horrid--yet my duty,
As doth a rock against the chiding flood,
Should the approach of this wild river break,
And stand unshaken yours.
Take notice, lords: he has a loyal breast,
For you have seen him open 't.
Read o'er this,
And after, this; and then to breakfast with
What appetite you have.
What sudden anger's this? How have I reaped it?
He parted frowning from me, as if ruin
Leaped from his eyes. So looks the chafed lion
Upon the daring huntsman that has galled him,
Then makes him nothing. I must read this paper--
This paper has undone me. 'Tis th' accompt
Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together
For mine own ends--indeed, to gain the popedom
And fee my friends in Rome. O negligence,
Fit for a fool to fall by! What cross devil
Made me put this main secret in the packet
No new device to beat this from his brains?
Will bring me off again.	
What's this? "To th' Pope"?
The letter, as I live, with all the business
And from that full meridian of my glory
Like a bright exhalation in the evening
And no man see me more.
Earl of Surrey, and the Lord Chamberlain.]
Hear the King's pleasure, cardinal, who commands
To render up the great seal presently
Into our hands, and to confine yourself
To Asher House, my Lord of Winchester's,
Till you hear further from his Highness.
Where's your commission, lords? Words cannot carry
Authority so weighty.
Bearing the King's will from his mouth expressly?
Till I find more than will or words to do it--
Of what coarse metal you are molded, envy;
How eagerly you follow my disgraces,
As if it fed you, and how sleek and wanton
You appear in everything may bring my ruin.
Follow your envious courses, men of malice;
You have Christian warrant for 'em, and no doubt
In time will find their fit rewards. That seal
You ask with such a violence, the King,
Mine and your master, with his own hand gave me;
Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honors,
During my life; and to confirm his goodness,
Tied it by letters patents. Now, who'll take it?
The King that gave it.
Thou art a proud traitor, priest.
Within these forty hours Surrey durst better
Have burnt that tongue than said so.
Thou scarlet sin, robbed this bewailing land
Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law.
The heads of all thy brother cardinals,
With thee and all thy best parts bound together,
Weighed not a hair of his. Plague of your policy!
You sent me Deputy for Ireland,
Far from his succor, from the King, from all
That might have mercy on the fault thou gav'st him,
Whilst your great goodness, out of holy pity,
Absolved him with an ax.
This talking lord can lay upon my credit,
Found his deserts. How innocent I was
From any private malice in his end,
His noble jury and foul cause can witness.--
If I loved many words, lord, I should tell you
You have as little honesty as honor,
That in the way of loyalty and truth
Toward the King, my ever royal master,
Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be,
And all that love his follies.
Your long coat, priest, protects you; thou shouldst feel
My sword i' th' life blood of thee else.--My lords,
Can you endure to hear this arrogance?
And from this fellow? If we live thus tamely,
To be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet,
Farewell, nobility. Let his Grace go forward
And dare us with his cap, like larks.
Is poison to thy stomach.
Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one,
Into your own hands, card'nal, by extortion;
The goodness of your intercepted packets
You writ to th' Pope against the King. Your goodness,
Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.--
My Lord of Norfolk, as you are truly noble,
As you respect the common good, the state
Of our despised nobility, our issues,
Whom, if he live, will scarce be gentlemen,
Produce the grand sum of his sins, the articles
Collected from his life.--I'll startle you
Worse than the sacring bell when the brown wench
Lay kissing in your arms, Lord Cardinal.
How much, methinks, I could despise this man,
But that I am bound in charity against it!
Those articles, my lord, are in the King's hand;
But thus much, they are foul ones.
And spotless shall mine innocence arise
When the King knows my truth.
Some of these articles, and out they shall.
Now, if you can blush and cry "Guilty," cardinal,
You'll show a little honesty.
It is to see a nobleman want manners.
First, that without the King's assent or knowledge,
You wrought to be a legate, by which power
You maimed the jurisdiction of all bishops.
Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else
To foreign princes, "ego et rex meus"
Was still inscribed, in which you brought the King
To be your servant.
Either of king or council, when you went
Ambassador to the Emperor, you made bold
To carry into Flanders the great seal.
Item, you sent a large commission
To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude,
Without the King's will or the state's allowance,
That out of mere ambition you have caused
Your holy hat to be stamped on the King's coin.
Then, that you have sent innumerable substance--
By what means got I leave to your own conscience--
To furnish Rome and to prepare the ways
You have for dignities, to the mere undoing
Of all the kingdom. Many more there are
Which, since they are of you, and odious,
Press not a falling man too far! 'Tis virtue.
His faults lie open to the laws; let them,
Not you, correct him. My heart weeps to see him
So little of his great self.
Lord Cardinal, the King's further pleasure is--
Because all those things you have done of late
By your power legative within this kingdom
Fall into th' compass of a praemunire--
That therefore such a writ be sued against you,
To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,
Chattels, and whatsoever, and to be
Out of the King's protection. This is my charge.
And so we'll leave you to your meditations
How to live better. For your stubborn answer
About the giving back the great seal to us,
The King shall know it and, no doubt, shall thank
So, fare you well, my little good Lord Cardinal.
So, farewell to the little good you bear me.
Farewell? A long farewell to all my greatness!
This is the state of man: today he puts forth
The tender leaves of hopes; tomorrow blossoms
And bears his blushing honors thick upon him;
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,
And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured,
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
This many summers in a sea of glory,
But far beyond my depth. My high-blown pride
At length broke under me and now has left me,
Weary and old with service, to the mercy
Of a rude stream that must forever hide me.
Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate you.
Is that poor man that hangs on princes' favors!
There is betwixt that smile we would aspire to,
That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin,
More pangs and fears than wars or women have;
And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again.
Why, how now, Cromwell?
At my misfortunes? Can thy spirit wonder
Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.
These ruined pillars, out of pity, taken
Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven.
Out of a fortitude of soul I feel,
To endure more miseries and greater far
Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.
What news abroad?
Is your displeasure with the King.
The next is that Sir Thomas More is chosen
Lord Chancellor in your place.
But he's a learned man. May he continue
Long in his Highness' favor and do justice
For truth's sake and his conscience, that his bones,
When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings,
May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on him.
What more?
Installed Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
That's news indeed.
Whom the King hath in secrecy long married,
This day was viewed in open as his queen,
Going to chapel, and the voice is now
Only about her coronation.
There was the weight that pulled me down.
The King has gone beyond me. All my glories
In that one woman I have lost forever.
No sun shall ever usher forth mine honors,
Or gild again the noble troops that waited
Upon my smiles. Go, get thee from me, Cromwell.
To be thy lord and master. Seek the King;
That sun, I pray, may never set! I have told him
What and how true thou art. He will advance thee;
Some little memory of me will stir him--
Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell,
Neglect him not. Make use now, and provide
For thine own future safety.
Must I then leave you? Must I needs forgo
So good, so noble, and so true a master?
Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,
With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.
The King shall have my service, but my prayers
Forever and forever shall be yours.
Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
In all my miseries, but thou hast forced me,
Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
Let's dry our eyes. And thus far hear me, Cromwell,
And when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention
Of me more must be heard of, say I taught thee;
Say Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory
And sounded all the depths and shoals of honor,
Found thee a way, out of his wrack, to rise in,
Mark but my fall and that that ruined me.
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition!
By that sin fell the angels; how can man, then,
The image of his maker, hope to win by it?
Love thyself last; cherish those hearts that hate thee.
Corruption wins not more than honesty.
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace
To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not.
Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,
Thy God's, and truth's. Then if thou fall'st, O Cromwell,
Thou fall'st a blessed martyr.
Serve the King. And, prithee, lead me in.
There take an inventory of all I have
To the last penny; 'tis the King's. My robe
And my integrity to heaven is all
Had I but served my God with half the zeal
Have left me naked to mine enemies.
Good sir, have patience.
The hopes of court! My hopes in heaven do dwell.
Gentleman carrying a paper.]
You're well met once again.
You come to take your stand here and behold
The Lady Anne pass from her coronation?
The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial.
This general joy.
As, let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward
In celebration of this day with shows,
Pageants, and sights of honor.
Nor, I'll assure you, better taken, sir.
May I be bold to ask what that contains,
That paper in your hand?
Of those that claim their offices this day
By custom of the coronation.
The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
To be High Steward; next, the Duke of Norfolk,
He to be Earl Marshal. You may read the rest.
But I beseech you, what's become of Katherine,
The Princess Dowager? How goes her business?
That I can tell you too. The Archbishop
Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
Learned and reverend fathers of his order,
Held a late court at Dunstable, six miles off
From Ampthill, where the Princess lay, to which
She was often cited by them, but appeared not;
And, to be short, for not appearance and
The King's late scruple, by the main assent
Of all these learned men she was divorced,
And the late marriage made of none effect;
Since which she was removed to Kymmalton,
Where she remains now sick.
The trumpets sound. Stand close. The Queen is coming.
Enter Mayor of London, bearing the mace. Then
Garter, in his coat of arms, and on his head he wore a
Surrey, bearing the rod of silver with the dove, crowned
Who's that that bears the scepter?
And that the Earl of Surrey with the rod.
Steward. With him, the Duke of Norfolk, with the rod of
Marshalship, a coronet on his head. Collars of S's.]
That should be
The Duke of Suffolk.
And that my Lord of Norfolk?
Bishops of London and Winchester.]
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever looked on.--
Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel.
Our king has all the Indies in his arms,
And more, and richer, when he strains that lady.
The cloth of honor over her are four barons
Of the Cinque-ports.
Those men are happy, and so are all are near her.
Certain Ladies or Countesses, with plain circlets of gold
Is that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk.
It is, and all the rest are countesses.
Their coronets say so. These are stars indeed.
And sometimes falling ones.
God save you, sir. Where have you been broiling?
Among the crowd i' th' Abbey, where a finger
Could not be wedged in more. I am stifled
With the mere rankness of their joy.
The ceremony?
Well worth the seeing.
As well as I am able. The rich stream
Of lords and ladies, having brought the Queen
To a prepared place in the choir, fell off
To rest awhile, some half an hour or so,
In a rich chair of state, opposing freely
The beauty of her person to the people.
Believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman
That ever lay by man, which when the people
Had the full view of, such a noise arose
As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest--
As loud and to as many tunes. Hats, cloaks,
Doublets, I think, flew up, and had their faces
Been loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy
That had not half a week to go, like rams
In the old time of war, would shake the press
And make 'em reel before 'em. No man living
Could say "This is my wife there," all were woven
So strangely in one piece.
At length her Grace rose, and with modest paces
Came to the altar, where she kneeled and saintlike
Cast her fair eyes to heaven and prayed devoutly,
Then rose again and bowed her to the people.
When by the Archbishop of Canterbury
She had all the royal makings of a queen--
As, holy oil, Edward Confessor's crown,
The rod, and bird of peace, and all such emblems--
Laid nobly on her; which performed, the choir,
With all the choicest music of the kingdom,
Together sung Te Deum. So she parted,
And with the same full state paced back again
To York Place, where the feast is held.
You must no more call it "York Place"; that's past,
For since the Cardinal fell, that title's lost.
But 'tis so lately altered that the old name
Is fresh about me.
Were those that went on each side of the Queen?
Stokeley and Gardiner, the one of Winchester,
Newly preferred from the King's secretary,
The other London.
Is held no great good lover of the Archbishop's,
The virtuous Cranmer.
However, yet there is no great breach. When it comes,
Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him.
Who may that be, I pray you?
Master o' th' Jewel House,
And one already of the Privy Council.
He will deserve more.
Come, gentlemen, you shall go my way,
Which is to th' court, and there you shall be my
Something I can command. As I walk thither,
How does your Grace?
My legs like loaden branches bow to th' earth,
Willing to leave their burden. Reach a chair.
So. Now, methinks, I feel a little ease.
Didst thou not tell me, Griffith, as thou ledst me,
That the great child of honor, Cardinal Wolsey,
Was dead?
Out of the pain you suffered, gave no ear to 't.
Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died.
If well, he stepped before me happily
For my example.
For after the stout Earl Northumberland
Arrested him at York and brought him forward,
As a man sorely tainted, to his answer,
He fell sick suddenly and grew so ill
He could not sit his mule.
At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester,
Lodged in the abbey, where the reverend abbot
With all his convent honorably received him;
To whom he gave these words: "O Father Abbot,
An old man, broken with the storms of state,
Is come to lay his weary bones among you.
Give him a little earth, for charity."
So went to bed, where eagerly his sickness
Pursued him still; and three nights after this,
About the hour of eight, which he himself
Foretold should be his last, full of repentance,
Continual meditations, tears, and sorrows,
He gave his honors to the world again,
His blessed part to heaven, and slept in peace.
So may he rest. His faults lie gently on him!
Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him,
And yet with charity. He was a man
Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
Himself with princes; one that by suggestion
Tied all the kingdom. Simony was fair play.
His own opinion was his law. I' th' presence
He would say untruths, and be ever double
Both in his words and meaning. He was never,
But where he meant to ruin, pitiful.
His promises were, as he then was, mighty,
But his performance, as he is now, nothing.
Of his own body he was ill, and gave
The clergy ill example.
Men's evil manners live in brass; their virtues
We write in water. May it please your Highness
To hear me speak his good now?
Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly
Was fashioned to much honor. From his cradle
He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one:
Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading;
Lofty and sour to them that loved him not,
But, to those men that sought him, sweet as summer.
And though he were unsatisfied in getting,
Which was a sin, yet in bestowing, madam,
He was most princely. Ever witness for him
Those twins of learning that he raised in you,
Ipswich and Oxford, one of which fell with him,
Unwilling to outlive the good that did it;
The other, though unfinished, yet so famous,
So excellent in art, and still so rising,
That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue.
His overthrow heaped happiness upon him,
For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
And found the blessedness of being little.
And, to add greater honors to his age
Than man could give him, he died fearing God.
After my death I wish no other herald,
No other speaker of my living actions,
To keep mine honor from corruption
But such an honest chronicler as Griffith.
Whom I most hated living, thou hast made me,
With thy religious truth and modesty,
Now in his ashes honor. Peace be with him!--
Patience, be near me still, and set me lower.
Cause the musicians play me that sad note
On that celestial harmony I go to.
She is asleep. Good wench, let's sit down quiet,
For fear we wake her. Softly, gentle Patience.
Enter, solemnly tripping one after another, six
Personages clad in white robes, wearing on their
Then the two that held the garland deliver the same
Spirits of peace, where are you? Are you all gone,
And leave me here in wretchedness behind you?
Madam, we are here.
Saw you none enter since I slept?
No? Saw you not, even now, a blessed troop
Invite me to a banquet, whose bright faces
Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun?
They promised me eternal happiness
And brought me garlands, Griffith, which I feel
Possess your fancy.
They are harsh and heavy to me.	
How much her Grace is altered on the sudden?
How long her face is drawn? How pale she looks,
And of an earthy cold? Mark her eyes.
She is going, wench. Pray, pray.
An 't like your Grace--
Deserve we no more reverence?
Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness,
To use so rude behavior. Go to. Kneel.
My haste made me unmannerly. There is staying
Admit him entrance, Griffith.	
But this fellow
Let me ne'er see again.	
If my sight fail not,
You should be Lord Ambassador from the Emperor,
My royal nephew, and your name Capuchius.
Madam, the same. Your servant.
The times and titles now are altered strangely
With me since first you knew me. But I pray you,
What is your pleasure with me?
First, mine own service to your Grace; the next,
The King's request that I would visit you,
Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me
Sends you his princely commendations,
And heartily entreats you take good comfort.
That gentle physic given in time had cured me.
But now I am past all comforts here but prayers.
How does his Highness?
So may he ever do, and ever flourish,
When I shall dwell with worms, and my poor name
Banished the kingdom.--Patience, is that letter
Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver
This to my lord the King--
In which I have commended to his goodness
The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter--
The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her!--
Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding--
She is young and of a noble, modest nature;
To love her for her mother's sake that loved him,
Heaven knows how dearly. My next poor petition
Is that his noble Grace would have some pity
Upon my wretched women, that so long
Have followed both my fortunes faithfully,
Of which there is not one, I dare avow--
And now I should not lie--but will deserve,
For virtue and true beauty of the soul,
For honesty and decent carriage,
And sure those men are happy that shall have 'em.
The last is for my men--they are the poorest,
But poverty could never draw 'em from me--
That they may have their wages duly paid 'em,
And something over to remember me by.
If heaven had pleased to have given me longer life
And able means, we had not parted thus.
These are the whole contents. And, good my lord,
By that you love the dearest in this world,
As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,
Stand these poor people's friend, and urge the King
To do me this last right.
Or let me lose the fashion of a man!
In all humility unto his Highness.
Say his long trouble now is passing
Out of this world. Tell him in death I blessed him,
For so I will. Mine eyes grow dim. Farewell,
My lord.--Griffith, farewell.--Nay, Patience,
You must not leave me yet. I must to bed;
Call in more women. When I am dead, good wench,
Let me be used with honor. Strew me over
With maiden flowers, that all the world may know
Then lay me forth. Although unqueened, yet like
It's one o'clock, boy, is 't not?
These should be hours for necessities,
Not for delights; times to repair our nature
With comforting repose, and not for us
To waste these times.--Good hour of night, Sir
Thomas.
Whither so late?
With the Duke of Suffolk.
Before he go to bed. I'll take my leave.
Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell. What's the matter?
It seems you are in haste. An if there be
No great offense belongs to 't, give your friend
Some touch of your late business. Affairs that walk,
As they say spirits do, at midnight have
In them a wilder nature than the business
That seeks dispatch by day.
And durst commend a secret to your ear
Much weightier than this work. The Queen's in
They say in great extremity--and feared
She'll with the labor end.
Good time and live; but for the stock, Sir Thomas,
Cry the amen, and yet my conscience says
She's a good creature and, sweet lady, does
Deserve our better wishes.
Hear me, Sir Thomas. You're a gentleman
Of mine own way. I know you wise, religious;
And let me tell you, it will ne'er be well,
Till Cranmer, Cromwell--her two hands--and she
Sleep in their graves.
The most remarked i' th' kingdom. As for Cromwell,
Besides that of the Jewel House, is made Master
Stands in the gap and trade of more preferments,
With which the time will load him. Th' Archbishop
Is the King's hand and tongue, and who dare speak
One syllable against him?
There are that dare, and I myself have ventured
To speak my mind of him. And indeed this day,
Sir--I may tell it you, I think--I have
Incensed the lords o' th' Council that he is--
For so I know he is, they know he is--
That does infect the land; with which they, moved,
Have broken with the King, who hath so far
Given ear to our complaint, of his great grace
And princely care foreseeing those fell mischiefs
Our reasons laid before him, hath commanded
Tomorrow morning to the Council board
He be convented. He's a rank weed, Sir Thomas,
And we must root him out. From your affairs
Many good nights, my lord. I rest your servant.
Charles, I will play no more tonight.
My mind's not on 't; you are too hard for me.
Sir, I did never win of you before.
Nor shall not when my fancy's on my play.--
Now, Lovell, from the Queen what is the news?
What you commanded me, but by her woman
In the great'st humbleness, and desired your Highness
Most heartily to pray for her.
To pray for her? What, is she crying out?
So said her woman, and that her suff'rance made
Almost each pang a death.
God safely quit her of her burden, and
With gentle travail, to the gladding of
Your Highness with an heir!
Prithee, to bed, and in thy prayers remember
Th' estate of my poor queen. Leave me alone,
For I must think of that which company
Would not be friendly to.
Remember in my prayers.
Well, sir, what follows?
Sir, I have brought my lord the Archbishop,
As you commanded me.
Ay, my good lord.
He attends your Highness' pleasure.
This is about that which the Bishop spake.
Avoid the gallery.	
Ha! I have said. Be gone!
What!	
How now, my lord? You do desire to know
Wherefore I sent for you.
My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury.
Come, you and I must walk a turn together.
Ah, my good lord, I grieve at what I speak,
And am right sorry to repeat what follows.
Heard many grievous--I do say, my lord,
Grievous--complaints of you, which, being
Have moved us and our Council that you shall
This morning come before us, where I know
You cannot with such freedom purge yourself
But that, till further trial in those charges
Which will require your answer, you must take
Your patience to you and be well contented
To make your house our Tower. You a brother of us,
It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness
Would come against you.
Highness,
And am right glad to catch this good occasion
Most throughly to be winnowed, where my chaff
And corn shall fly asunder. For I know
There's none stands under more calumnious tongues
Than I myself, poor man.
Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted
In us, thy friend. Give me thy hand. Stand up.
Prithee, let's walk. Now by my halidom,
What manner of man are you? My lord, I looked
You would have given me your petition that
Yourself and your accusers and to have heard you
Without endurance further.
The good I stand on is my truth and honesty.
If they shall fail, I with mine enemies
Will triumph o'er my person, which I weigh not,
Being of those virtues vacant. I fear nothing
What can be said against me.
How your state stands i' th' world, with the whole
Your enemies are many and not small; their practices
Must bear the same proportion, and not ever
The justice and the truth o' th' question carries
The due o' th' verdict with it. At what ease
Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt
To swear against you? Such things have been done.
You are potently opposed, and with a malice
Of as great size. Ween you of better luck,
Whose minister you are, whiles here he lived
Upon this naughty earth? Go to, go to.
You take a precipice for no leap of danger
And woo your own destruction.
Protect mine innocence, or I fall into
The trap is laid for me.
They shall no more prevail than we give way to.
Keep comfort to you, and this morning see
You do appear before them. If they shall chance,
In charging you with matters, to commit you,
The best persuasions to the contrary
Fail not to use, and with what vehemency
Th' occasion shall instruct you. If entreaties
Will render you no remedy, this ring
Deliver them, and your appeal to us
There make before them.	
He's honest, on mine honor! God's blest mother,
None better in my kingdom.--Get you gone,
And do as I have bid you.	
He has strangled
His language in his tears.
Will make my boldness manners.--Now, good angels
Fly o'er thy royal head and shade thy person
Under their blessed wings!
Say "Ay, and of a boy."
And of a lovely boy. The God of heaven
Both now and ever bless her! 'Tis a girl
Promises boys hereafter. Sir, your queen
Desires your visitation, and to be
Acquainted with this stranger. 'Tis as like you
As cherry is to cherry.
Give her an hundred marks. I'll to the Queen.
An hundred marks? By this light, I'll ha' more.
An ordinary groom is for such payment.
Said I for this the girl was like to him?
While 'tis hot, I'll put it to the issue.
Footboys, Grooms, and other servants attend at the
Council door.)]
That was sent to me from the Council prayed me
To make great haste.	
All fast? What means this? Ho!
Who waits there?
Sure you know me!
But yet I cannot help you.
Your Grace must wait till you be called for.
This is a piece of malice. I am glad
Shall understand it presently.	
The King's physician. As he passed along
How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me!
Pray heaven he sound not my disgrace. For certain
This is of purpose laid by some that hate me--
God turn their hearts! I never sought their malice--
To quench mine honor. They would shame to make me
Wait else at door, a fellow councillor,
Must be fulfilled, and I attend with patience.
Butts?
Body o' me, where is it?
The high promotion of his Grace of Canterbury,
Who holds his state at door, 'mongst pursuivants,
Pages, and footboys.
Is this the honor they do one another?
They had parted so much honesty among 'em--
At least good manners--as not thus to suffer
To dance attendance on their Lordships' pleasures,
And at the door, too, like a post with packets.
By holy Mary, Butts, there's knavery!
Let 'em alone, and draw the curtain close.
We shall hear more anon.	
Duke of Suffolk, Duke of Norfolk, Surrey, Lord
Chamberlain, Gardiner seat themselves in order on each
Speak to the business, Master Secretary.
Why are we met in council?
The chief cause concerns his Grace of Canterbury.
Has he had knowledge of it?
Without, my noble lords?
And has done half an hour, to know your pleasures.
Let him come in.
My good lord Archbishop, I'm very sorry
To sit here at this present and behold
That chair stand empty. But we all are men,
In our own natures frail, and capable
Of our flesh--few are angels--out of which frailty
And want of wisdom you, that best should teach us,
Have misdemeaned yourself, and not a little,
Toward the King first, then his laws, in filling
The whole realm, by your teaching and your
For so we are informed--with new opinions,
Divers and dangerous, which are heresies
And, not reformed, may prove pernicious.
Which reformation must be sudden too,
My noble lords; for those that tame wild horses
Pace 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle,
But stop their mouths with stubborn bits, and spur 'em
Till they obey the manage. If we suffer,
Out of our easiness and childish pity
To one man's honor, this contagious sickness,
Farewell, all physic. And what follows then?
Commotions, uproars, with a general taint
Of the whole state, as of late days our neighbors,
The upper Germany, can dearly witness,
Yet freshly pitied in our memories.
My good lords, hitherto, in all the progress
Both of my life and office, I have labored,
And with no little study, that my teaching
And the strong course of my authority
Might go one way and safely; and the end
Was ever to do well. Nor is there living--
Both in his private conscience and his place,
Defacers of a public peace than I do.
Pray heaven the King may never find a heart
With less allegiance in it! Men that make
Envy and crooked malice nourishment
Dare bite the best. I do beseech your Lordships
That, in this case of justice, my accusers,
Be what they will, may stand forth face to face
And freely urge against me.
That cannot be. You are a councillor,
And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.
My lord, because we have business of more moment,
We will be short with you. 'Tis his Highness' pleasure,
And our consent, for better trial of you
From hence you be committed to the Tower,
Where, being but a private man again,
You shall know many dare accuse you boldly--
More than, I fear, you are provided for.
Ah, my good Lord of Winchester, I thank you.
You are always my good friend. If your will pass,
You are so merciful. I see your end:
Become a churchman better than ambition.
Win straying souls with modesty again;
Cast none away. That I shall clear myself,
Lay all the weight you can upon my patience,
In doing daily wrongs. I could say more,
But reverence to your calling makes me modest.
My lord, my lord, you are a sectary.
That's the plain truth. Your painted gloss discovers,
To men that understand you, words and weakness.
My Lord of Winchester, you're a little,
By your good favor, too sharp. Men so noble,
However faulty, yet should find respect
For what they have been. 'Tis a cruelty
To load a falling man.
Of all this table say so.
Do not I know you for a favorer
Of this new sect? You are not sound.
Not sound, I say.
Men's prayers then would seek you, not their fears.
Remember your bold life too.
Forbear, for shame, my lords.
Then thus for you, my lord: it stands agreed,
You be conveyed to th' Tower a prisoner,
There to remain till the King's further pleasure
Be known unto us.--Are you all agreed, lords?
We are.
But I must needs to th' Tower, my lords?
Would you expect? You are strangely troublesome.
Let some o' th' guard be ready there.
Must I go like a traitor thither?
And see him safe i' th' Tower.
By virtue of that ring, I take my cause
Out of the grips of cruel men and give it
To a most noble judge, the King my master.
This is the King's ring.
When we first put this dangerous stone a-rolling,
The King will suffer but the little finger
Of this man to be vexed?
How much more is his life in value with him!
Would I were fairly out on 't!
In seeking tales and informations
Against this man, whose honesty the devil
And his disciples only envy at,
You blew the fire that burns you. Now, have at you!
Dread sovereign, how much are we bound to heaven
In daily thanks, that gave us such a prince,
Not only good and wise, but most religious;
One that in all obedience makes the Church
The chief aim of his honor, and to strengthen
That holy duty out of dear respect,
His royal self in judgment comes to hear
The cause betwixt her and this great offender.
You were ever good at sudden commendations,
Bishop of Winchester. But know I come not
To hear such flattery now, and in my presence
They are too thin and base to hide offenses.
To me you cannot reach. You play the spaniel,
And think with wagging of your tongue to win me;
But whatsoe'er thou tak'st me for, I'm sure
Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody.--
Good man, sit down.	
Now let me see the proudest
He, that dares most, but wag his finger at thee.
By all that's holy, he had better starve
Than but once think this place becomes thee not.
May it please your Grace--
And wisdom of my Council, but I find none.
Was it discretion, lords, to let this man,
This good man--few of you deserve that title--
This honest man, wait like a lousy footboy
At chamber door? And one as great as you are?
Why, what a shame was this! Did my commission
Bid you so far forget yourselves? I gave you
Power as he was a councillor to try him,
Not as a groom. There's some of you, I see,
More out of malice than integrity,
Would try him to the utmost, had you mean,
Which you shall never have while I live.
My most dread sovereign, may it like your Grace
To let my tongue excuse all. What was purposed
Concerning his imprisonment was rather,
If there be faith in men, meant for his trial
And fair purgation to the world than malice,
Take him, and use him well; he's worthy of it.
May be beholding to a subject, I
Am, for his love and service, so to him.
Make me no more ado, but all embrace him.
Be friends, for shame, my lords.
My Lord of Canterbury,
That is, a fair young maid that yet wants baptism.
You must be godfather and answer for her.
The greatest monarch now alive may glory
In such an honor. How may I deserve it,
That am a poor and humble subject to you?
You shall have two noble partners with you: the
Will these please you?--
Once more, my lord of Winchester, I charge you,
Embrace and love this man.
And brother-love I do it.	
Witness how dear I hold this confirmation.
Good man, those joyful tears show thy true heart.
The common voice, I see, is verified
Of thee, which says thus: "Do my Lord of Canterbury
Come, lords, we trifle time away. I long
To have this young one made a Christian.
As I have made you one, lords, one remain.
So I grow stronger, you more honor gain.
Is this a place to roar in?--Fetch me a dozen crab-tree
Pray, sir, be patient. 'Tis as much impossible--
Unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannons--
To scatter 'em as 'tis to make 'em sleep
On May Day morning, which will never be.
We may as well push against Paul's as stir 'em.
Alas, I know not. How gets the tide in?
As much as one sound cudgel of four foot--
You see the poor remainder--could distribute,
To mow 'em down before me; but if I spared any
That had a head to hit, either young or old,
He or she, cuckold or cuckold-maker,
Let me ne'er hope to see a chine again--
And that I would not for a cow, God save her!
Limehouse, their dear brothers, are able to
Mercy o' me, what a multitude are here!
They grow still too. From all parts they are coming,
As if we kept a fair here! Where are these porters,
These lazy knaves?--You've made a fine hand, fellows!
There's a trim rabble let in. Are all these
Your faithful friends o' th' suburbs? We shall have
Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies,
When they pass back from the christening!
We are but men, and what so many may do,
Not being torn a-pieces, we have done.
An army cannot rule 'em.
If the King blame me for 't, I'll lay you all
By th' heels, and suddenly, and on your heads
Clap round fines for neglect. You're lazy knaves,
And here you lie baiting of bombards, when
You should do service.	
Hark, the trumpets sound!
They're come already from the christening.
Go break among the press, and find a way out
To let the troop pass fairly, or I'll find
Make way there for the Princess!
Stand close up, or I'll make your head ache.
You i' th' camlet, get up o' th' rail!
Mayor, Garter, Cranmer, Duke of Norfolk with his
Noblemen bearing a canopy, under which the Duchess
Marchioness Dorset, the other godmother, and Ladies.
The troop pass once about the stage, and Garter speaks.]
And to your royal Grace and the good queen,
My noble partners and myself thus pray
All comfort, joy, in this most gracious lady
Heaven ever laid up to make parents happy
May hourly fall upon you!
Archbishop.
What is her name?
With this kiss take my blessing.	
God protect thee,
Into whose hand I give thy life.
My noble gossips, you've been too prodigal.
When she has so much English.
For heaven now bids me; and the words I utter
Let none think flattery, for they'll find 'em truth.
This royal infant--heaven still move about her!--
Though in her cradle, yet now promises
Upon this land a thousand thousand blessings,
Which time shall bring to ripeness. She shall be--
But few now living can behold that goodness--
And all that shall succeed. Saba was never
More covetous of wisdom and fair virtue
Than this pure soul shall be. All princely graces
That mold up such a mighty piece as this is,
With all the virtues that attend the good,
Shall still be doubled on her. Truth shall nurse her;
Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her.
She shall be loved and feared. Her own shall bless her;
Her foes shake like a field of beaten corn
And hang their heads with sorrow. Good grows with
In her days every man shall eat in safety
Under his own vine what he plants and sing
The merry songs of peace to all his neighbors.
God shall be truly known, and those about her
From her shall read the perfect ways of honor
And by those claim their greatness, not by blood.
Nor shall this peace sleep with her; but, as when
The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix,
Her ashes new create another heir
As great in admiration as herself,
So shall she leave her blessedness to one,
When heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness,
Who from the sacred ashes of her honor
Shall starlike rise as great in fame as she was
And so stand fixed. Peace, plenty, love, truth, terror,
That were the servants to this chosen infant,
Shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him.
Wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine,
His honor and the greatness of his name
Shall be, and make new nations. He shall flourish,
And like a mountain cedar reach his branches
To all the plains about him. Our children's children
Shall see this and bless heaven.
She shall be to the happiness of England
An aged princess; many days shall see her,
And yet no day without a deed to crown it.
Would I had known no more! But she must die,
She must, the saints must have her; yet a virgin,
To th' ground, and all the world shall mourn her.
Archbishop,
Thou hast made me now a man. Never before
This happy child did I get anything.
This oracle of comfort has so pleased me
That when I am in heaven I shall desire
To see what this child does and praise my Maker.--
And you, good brethren, I am much beholding.
And you shall find me thankful. Lead the way, lords.
You must all see the Queen, and she must thank you;
She will be sick else. This day, no man think
This little one shall make it holiday.
All that are here. Some come to take their ease
And sleep an act or two--but those, we fear,
We've frighted with our trumpets; so, 'tis clear,
They'll say 'tis naught--others, to hear the city
Abused extremely and to cry "That's witty!"--
Which we have not done neither--that I fear
All the expected good we're like to hear
For this play at this time is only in
The merciful construction of good women,
For such a one we showed 'em. If they smile
And say 'twill do, I know within a while
All the best men are ours; for 'tis ill hap
If they hold when their ladies bid 'em clap.
When shall we three meet again?
In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
When the hurly-burly's done,
When the battle's lost and won.
That will be ere the set of sun.
Where the place?
There to meet with Macbeth.
Fair is foul, and foul is fair;
Hover through the fog and filthy air.
Donalbain, Lennox, with Attendants, meeting a bleeding
Captain.]
What bloody man is that? He can report,
As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
The newest state.
Who, like a good and hardy soldier, fought
Say to the King the knowledge of the broil
As thou didst leave it.
As two spent swimmers that do cling together
And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald
The multiplying villainies of nature
Do swarm upon him) from the Western Isles
Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
And Fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
Showed like a rebel's whore. But all's too weak;
For brave Macbeth ,
Disdaining Fortune, with his brandished steel,
Which smoked with bloody execution,
Like Valor's minion, carved out his passage
Till he faced the slave;
Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
Till he unseamed him from the nave to th' chops,
And fixed his head upon our battlements.
As whence the sun 'gins his reflection
Shipwracking storms and direful thunders break,
So from that spring whence comfort seemed to
Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark:
No sooner justice had, with valor armed,
Compelled these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
With furbished arms and new supplies of men,
Began a fresh assault.
Dismayed not this our captains, Macbeth and
Banquo?
Yes, as sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
If I say sooth, I must report they were
As cannons overcharged with double cracks,
So they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe.
Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds
Or memorize another Golgotha,
But I am faint. My gashes cry for help.
So well thy words become thee as thy wounds:
They smack of honor both.--Go, get him surgeons.
Who comes here?
What a haste looks through his eyes!
So should he look that seems to speak things
Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
And fan our people cold.
Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
Assisted by that most disloyal traitor,
The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict,
Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapped in proof,
Confronted him with self-comparisons,
Point against point, rebellious arm 'gainst arm,
Curbing his lavish spirit. And to conclude,
The victory fell on us.
The Norways' king, craves composition.
Nor would we deign him burial of his men
Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's Inch
Ten thousand dollars to our general use.
No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
Our bosom interest. Go, pronounce his present
And with his former title greet Macbeth.
What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.
And munched and munched and munched. "Give
Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' th' Tiger;
But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
And, like a rat without a tail,
Th' art kind.
And I another.
And the very ports they blow;
All the quarters that they know
Sleep shall neither night nor day
Hang upon his penthouse lid.
He shall live a man forbid.
Weary sev'nnights, nine times nine,
Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine.
Though his bark cannot be lost,
Yet it shall be tempest-tossed.
Look what I have.
Here I have a pilot's thumb,
Wracked as homeward he did come.	
Macbeth doth come.
The Weird Sisters, hand in hand,
Posters of the sea and land,
Thus do go about, about,
Thrice to thine and thrice to mine
And thrice again, to make up nine.
Peace, the charm's wound up.
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
How far is 't called to Forres?--What are these,
So withered, and so wild in their attire,
That look not like th' inhabitants o' th' Earth
And yet are on 't?--Live you? Or are you aught
That man may question? You seem to understand
By each at once her choppy finger laying
Upon her skinny lips. You should be women,
And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
That you are so.
All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!
All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!
All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be king hereafter!
Good sir, why do you start and seem to fear
Things that do sound so fair?--I' th' name of truth,
Are you fantastical, or that indeed
Which outwardly you show? My noble partner
You greet with present grace and great prediction
Of noble having and of royal hope,
That he seems rapt withal. To me you speak not.
If you can look into the seeds of time
And say which grain will grow and which will not,
Speak, then, to me, who neither beg nor fear
Your favors nor your hate.
Lesser than Macbeth and greater.
Not so happy, yet much happier.
Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none.
So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!
Stay, you imperfect speakers. Tell me more.
By Sinel's death I know I am Thane of Glamis.
But how of Cawdor? The Thane of Cawdor lives
Stands not within the prospect of belief,
No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
You owe this strange intelligence or why
Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
With such prophetic greeting. Speak, I charge you.
The earth hath bubbles, as the water has,
And these are of them. Whither are they vanished?
Into the air, and what seemed corporal melted,
As breath into the wind. Would they had stayed!
Were such things here as we do speak about?
Or have we eaten on the insane root
That takes the reason prisoner?
Your children shall be kings.
And Thane of Cawdor too. Went it not so?
To th' selfsame tune and words.--Who's here?
The King hath happily received, Macbeth,
The news of thy success, and, when he reads
Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,
His wonders and his praises do contend
Which should be thine or his. Silenced with that,
In viewing o'er the rest o' th' selfsame day
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
Strange images of death. As thick as tale
Came post with post, and every one did bear
Thy praises in his kingdom's great defense,
And poured them down before him.
To give thee from our royal master thanks,
Only to herald thee into his sight,
Not pay thee.
And for an earnest of a greater honor,
He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor,
In which addition, hail, most worthy thane,
For it is thine.
The Thane of Cawdor lives. Why do you dress me
In borrowed robes?
But under heavy judgment bears that life
Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was
With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
He labored in his country's wrack, I know not;
But treasons capital, confessed and proved,
Have overthrown him.
The greatest is behind.  Thanks
When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
Promised no less to them?
Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange.
And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
The instruments of darkness tell us truths,
Win us with honest trifles, to betray 's
In deepest consequence.--
Cousins, a word, I pray you.	
As happy prologues to the swelling act
Of the imperial theme.--I thank you, gentlemen.
Cannot be ill, cannot be good. If ill,
Why hath it given me earnest of success
Commencing in a truth? I am Thane of Cawdor.
If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair
And make my seated heart knock at my ribs
Against the use of nature? Present fears
Are less than horrible imaginings.
My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,
Shakes so my single state of man
That function is smothered in surmise,
And nothing is but what is not.
If chance will have me king, why, chance may
Without my stir.
Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mold
But with the aid of use.
Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.
Give me your favor. My dull brain was wrought
With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains
Are registered where every day I turn
The leaf to read them. Let us toward the King.
The interim having weighed it, let us speak
Our free hearts each to other.
Donalbain, and Attendants.]
Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
Those in commission yet returned?
They are not yet come back. But I have spoke
With one that saw him die, who did report
That very frankly he confessed his treasons,
Implored your Highness' pardon, and set forth
Became him like the leaving it. He died
As one that had been studied in his death
To throw away the dearest thing he owed
As 'twere a careless trifle.
To find the mind's construction in the face.
He was a gentleman on whom I built
An absolute trust.
The sin of my ingratitude even now
Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before
That swiftest wing of recompense is slow
To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved,
That the proportion both of thanks and payment
Might have been mine! Only I have left to say,
More is thy due than more than all can pay.
The service and the loyalty I owe
In doing it pays itself. Your Highness' part
Is to receive our duties, and our duties
Are to your throne and state children and servants,
Which do but what they should by doing everything
Safe toward your love and honor.
To make thee full of growing.--Noble Banquo,
That hast no less deserved nor must be known
No less to have done so, let me enfold thee
And hold thee to my heart.
The harvest is your own.
Wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves
In drops of sorrow.--Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
And you whose places are the nearest, know
We will establish our estate upon
Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter
The Prince of Cumberland; which honor must
Not unaccompanied invest him only,
But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
On all deservers.--From hence to Inverness
And bind us further to you.
The rest is labor which is not used for you.
The hearing of my wife with your approach.
So humbly take my leave.
The Prince of Cumberland! That is a step
On which I must fall down or else o'erleap,
For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires;
Let not light see my black and deep desires.
The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be
Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.
True, worthy Banquo. He is full so valiant,
And in his commendations I am fed:
It is a banquet to me.--Let's after him,
Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome.
It is a peerless kinsman.
When I burned in desire to question them further, they
Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it came missives
Glamis thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be
What thou art promised. Yet do I fear thy nature;
It is too full o' th' milk of human kindness
To catch the nearest way. Thou wouldst be great,
Art not without ambition, but without
The illness should attend it. What thou wouldst
That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false
And yet wouldst wrongly win. Thou 'dst have, great
Glamis,
That which cries "Thus thou must do," if thou have
And that which rather thou dost fear to do,
Than wishest should be undone. Hie thee hither,
That I may pour my spirits in thine ear
And chastise with the valor of my tongue
All that impedes thee from the golden round,
Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
To have thee crowned withal.
What is your tidings?
The King comes here tonight.
Is not thy master with him, who, were 't so,
Would have informed for preparation?
So please you, it is true. Our thane is coming.
One of my fellows had the speed of him,
Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
Than would make up his message.
He brings great news.	
The raven himself is hoarse
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
Under my battlements. Come, you spirits
That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full
Of direst cruelty. Make thick my blood.
Stop up th' access and passage to remorse,
That no compunctious visitings of nature
Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
Th' effect and it. Come to my woman's breasts
And take my milk for gall, you murd'ring ministers,
Wherever in your sightless substances
You wait on nature's mischief. Come, thick night,
And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,
That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
To cry "Hold, hold!"
Great Glamis, worthy Cawdor,
Greater than both by the all-hail hereafter!
Thy letters have transported me beyond
This ignorant present, and I feel now
The future in the instant.
Duncan comes here tonight.
Tomorrow, as he purposes.
Shall sun that morrow see!
Your face, my thane, is as a book where men
May read strange matters. To beguile the time,
Look like the time. Bear welcome in your eye,
Your hand, your tongue. Look like th' innocent
But be the serpent under 't. He that's coming
Must be provided for; and you shall put
This night's great business into my dispatch,
Which shall to all our nights and days to come
Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
We will speak further.
To alter favor ever is to fear.
Leave all the rest to me.
Donalbain, Banquo, Lennox, Macduff, Ross, Angus, and
Attendants.]
This castle hath a pleasant seat. The air
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
Unto our gentle senses.
The temple-haunting martlet, does approve,
By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath
Smells wooingly here. No jutty, frieze,
Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
Hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle.
Where they most breed and haunt, I have
The air is delicate.
The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,
Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you
How you shall bid God 'ild us for your pains
And thank us for your trouble.
In every point twice done and then done double,
Were poor and single business to contend
Against those honors deep and broad wherewith
Your Majesty loads our house. For those of old,
And the late dignities heaped up to them,
We rest your hermits.
We coursed him at the heels and had a purpose
To be his purveyor; but he rides well,
And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath helped
To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,
We are your guest tonight.
Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs in compt
To make their audit at your Highness' pleasure,
Still to return your own.
Conduct me to mine host. We love him highly
And shall continue our graces towards him.
By your leave, hostess.
Macbeth.]
If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well
It were done quickly. If th' assassination
Could trammel up the consequence and catch
With his surcease success, that but this blow
Might be the be-all and the end-all here,
But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
We'd jump the life to come. But in these cases
We still have judgment here, that we but teach
Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return
To plague th' inventor. This even-handed justice
Commends th' ingredience of our poisoned chalice
To our own lips. He's here in double trust:
First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
Who should against his murderer shut the door,
Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan
Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
So clear in his great office, that his virtues
Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against
The deep damnation of his taking-off;
And pity, like a naked newborn babe
Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubin horsed
Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur
To prick the sides of my intent, but only
Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself
And falls on th' other--
How now, what news?
He has almost supped. Why have you left the
Hath he asked for me?
We will proceed no further in this business.
He hath honored me of late, and I have bought
Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
Not cast aside so soon.
Wherein you dressed yourself? Hath it slept since?
And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
At what it did so freely? From this time
Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard
To be the same in thine own act and valor
As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that
Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life
And live a coward in thine own esteem,
Letting "I dare not" wait upon "I would,"
Like the poor cat i' th' adage?
Who dares do more is none.
That made you break this enterprise to me?
When you durst do it, then you were a man;
And to be more than what you were, you would
Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
Did then adhere, and yet you would make both.
They have made themselves, and that their fitness
Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know
How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me.
Have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums
And dashed the brains out, had I so sworn as you
Have done to this.
But screw your courage to the sticking place
And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep
Soundly invite him), his two chamberlains
Will I with wine and wassail so convince
That memory, the warder of the brain,
Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason
Their drenched natures lies as in a death,
What cannot you and I perform upon
Th' unguarded Duncan? What not put upon
His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
Of our great quell?
For thy undaunted mettle should compose
Nothing but males. Will it not be received,
When we have marked with blood those sleepy two
Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,
That they have done 't?
As we shall make our griefs and clamor roar
Upon his death?
Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.
Away, and mock the time with fairest show.
False face must hide what the false heart doth
The moon is down. I have not heard the clock.
Hold, take my sword.	
There's husbandry in heaven;
Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.
And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers,
Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature
Gives way to in repose.
Give me my sword.--Who's
What, sir, not yet at rest? The King's abed.
He hath been in unusual pleasure, and
Sent forth great largess to your offices.
This diamond he greets your wife withal,
By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up
In measureless content.
Our will became the servant to defect,
Which else should free have wrought.
To you they have showed some truth.
Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
We would spend it in some words upon that
If you would grant the time.
If you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis,
It shall make honor for you.
In seeking to augment it, but still keep
My bosom franchised and allegiance clear,
Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.
Is this a dagger which I see before me,
The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch
Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
To feeling as to sight? Or art thou but
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
As this which now I draw.	
Thou marshal'st me the way that I was going,
And such an instrument I was to use.
Mine eyes are made the fools o' th' other senses
Or else worth all the rest. I see thee still,
And, on thy blade and dudgeon, gouts of blood,
Which was not so before. There's no such thing.
It is the bloody business which informs
Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one-half world
Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
The curtained sleep. Witchcraft celebrates
Pale Hecate's off'rings, and withered murder,
Alarumed by his sentinel, the wolf,
Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his
Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth,
Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
Thy very stones prate of my whereabouts
And take the present horror from the time,
Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives.
Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell
That summons thee to heaven or to hell.
That which hath made them drunk hath made me
What hath quenched them hath given me fire.
Hark!--Peace.
It was the owl that shrieked, the fatal bellman,
Which gives the stern'st good-night. He is about it.
The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms
Do mock their charge with snores. I have drugged
That death and nature do contend about them
Whether they live or die.
Alack, I am afraid they have awaked,
And 'tis not done. Th' attempt and not the deed
Confounds us. Hark!--I laid their daggers ready;
He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled
My father as he slept, I had done 't.
My husband?
Did not you speak?
There's one did laugh in 's sleep, and one cried
That they did wake each other. I stood and heard
But they did say their prayers and addressed them
Again to sleep.
One cried "God bless us" and "Amen" the other,
As they had seen me with these hangman's hands,
List'ning their fear. I could not say "Amen"
When they did say "God bless us."
But wherefore could not I pronounce "Amen"?
Stuck in my throat.
After these ways; so, it will make us mad.
Methought I heard a voice cry "Sleep no more!
Macbeth does murder sleep"--the innocent sleep,
Sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care,
The death of each day's life, sore labor's bath,
Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course,
Chief nourisher in life's feast.
Still it cried "Sleep no more!" to all the house.
Cawdor
Shall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more."
Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane,
You do unbend your noble strength to think
So brainsickly of things. Go get some water
And wash this filthy witness from your hand.--
Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
They must lie there. Go, carry them and smear
The sleepy grooms with blood.
Look on 't again I dare not.
Give me the daggers. The sleeping and the dead
Are but as pictures. 'Tis the eye of childhood
That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,
For it must seem their guilt.
How is 't with me when every noise appalls me?
What hands are here! Ha, they pluck out mine eyes.
Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood
Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
The multitudinous seas incarnadine,
Making the green one red.
My hands are of your color, but I shame
To wear a heart so white.	
At the south entry. Retire we to our chamber.
How easy is it, then! Your constancy
Hath left you unattended.	
Hark, more knocking.
Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us
And show us to be watchers. Be not lost
So poorly in your thoughts.
To know my deed 'twere best not know myself.
Wake Duncan with thy knocking. I would thou
Have napkins enough about you; here you'll sweat
Never at quiet.--What are you?--But this place is
Anon, anon!
Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed
That you do lie so late?
Lechery, sir, it provokes and unprovokes. It provokes
Therefore much drink may be said to be an
Our knocking has awaked him. Here he comes.
Good morrow, noble sir.
Is the King stirring, worthy thane?
He did command me to call timely on him.
But yet 'tis one.
The labor we delight in physics pain.
This is the door.
For 'tis my limited service.	
The night has been unruly. Where we lay,
Our chimneys were blown down and, as they say,
Lamentings heard i' th' air, strange screams of
And prophesying, with accents terrible,
Of dire combustion and confused events
New hatched to th' woeful time. The obscure bird
Clamored the livelong night. Some say the Earth
Was feverous and did shake.
My young remembrance cannot parallel
Tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!
Confusion now hath made his masterpiece.
Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope
The Lord's anointed temple and stole thence
The life o' th' building.
Approach the chamber and destroy your sight
With a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak.
See and then speak yourselves.
Awake, awake!
Ring the alarum bell.--Murder and treason!
Banquo and Donalbain, Malcolm, awake!
Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit,
And look on death itself. Up, up, and see
The great doom's image. Malcolm, Banquo,
As from your graves rise up and walk like sprites
To countenance this horror.--Ring the bell.
That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
The sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!
The repetition in a woman's ear
Would murder as it fell.
Our royal master's murdered.
What, in our house?
Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself
And say it is not so.
Had I but died an hour before this chance,
There's nothing serious in mortality.
All is but toys. Renown and grace is dead.
The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
Is left this vault to brag of.
The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
Is stopped; the very source of it is stopped.
Your royal father's murdered.
Those of his chamber, as it seemed, had done 't.
Their hands and faces were all badged with blood.
So were their daggers, which unwiped we found
Upon their pillows. They stared and were distracted.
No man's life was to be trusted with them.
That I did kill them.
Who can be wise, amazed, temp'rate, and furious,
Loyal, and neutral, in a moment? No man.
Th' expedition of my violent love
Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan,
His silver skin laced with his golden blood,
And his gashed stabs looked like a breach in nature
For ruin's wasteful entrance; there the murderers,
Steeped in the colors of their trade, their daggers
Unmannerly breeched with gore. Who could refrain
That had a heart to love, and in that heart
Courage to make 's love known?
Look to the lady.
That most may claim this argument for ours?
What should be spoken here, where our fate,
Hid in an auger hole, may rush and seize us?
Let's away. Our tears are not yet brewed.
Nor our strong sorrow upon the foot of motion.
And when we have our naked frailties hid,
That suffer in exposure, let us meet
And question this most bloody piece of work
To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us.
In the great hand of God I stand, and thence
Against the undivulged pretense I fight
Of treasonous malice.
Let's briefly put on manly readiness
And meet i' th' hall together.
What will you do? Let's not consort with them.
To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
Which the false man does easy. I'll to England.
To Ireland I. Our separated fortune
Shall keep us both the safer. Where we are,
There's daggers in men's smiles. The near in blood,
The nearer bloody.
Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way
Is to avoid the aim. Therefore to horse,
And let us not be dainty of leave-taking
But shift away. There's warrant in that theft
Which steals itself when there's no mercy left.
Threescore and ten I can remember well,
Within the volume of which time I have seen
Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore
Hath trifled former knowings.
Thou seest the heavens, as troubled with man's act,
Threatens his bloody stage. By th' clock 'tis day,
And yet dark night strangles the traveling lamp.
Is 't night's predominance or the day's shame
That darkness does the face of earth entomb
When living light should kiss it?
Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last
Was by a mousing owl hawked at and killed.
And Duncan's horses (a thing most strange and
Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
Turned wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would
Make war with mankind.
They did so, to th' amazement of mine eyes
That looked upon 't.
Here comes the good
Macduff.--
How goes the world, sir, now?
Is 't known who did this more than bloody deed?
Those that Macbeth hath slain.
What good could they pretend?
Malcolm and Donalbain, the King's two sons,
Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them
Suspicion of the deed.
Thriftless ambition, that will ravin up
Thine own lives' means. Then 'tis most like
The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.
He is already named and gone to Scone
To be invested.
The sacred storehouse of his predecessors
And guardian of their bones.
No, cousin, I'll to Fife.
Well, may you see things well done there. Adieu,
Lest our old robes sit easier than our new.
God's benison go with you and with those
That would make good of bad and friends of foes.
Thou hast it now--king, Cawdor, Glamis, all
As the Weird Women promised, and I fear
Thou played'st most foully for 't. Yet it was said
It should not stand in thy posterity,
But that myself should be the root and father
Of many kings. If there come truth from them
Why, by the verities on thee made good,
May they not be my oracles as well,
And set me up in hope? But hush, no more.
Macbeth, Lennox, Ross, Lords, and Attendants.]
Here's our chief guest.
It had been as a gap in our great feast
And all-thing unbecoming.
Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir,
And I'll request your presence.
Command upon me, to the which my duties
Are with a most indissoluble tie
Forever knit.
We should have else desired your good advice
In this day's council, but we'll take tomorrow.
Is 't far you ride?
As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
For a dark hour or twain.
We hear our bloody cousins are bestowed
In England and in Ireland, not confessing
Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
With strange invention. But of that tomorrow,
When therewithal we shall have cause of state
Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse. Adieu,
Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?
Ay, my good lord. Our time does call upon 's.
And so I do commend you to their backs.
Farewell.	
Let every man be master of his time
Till seven at night. To make society
The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
Till suppertime alone. While then, God be with you.
Sirrah, a word with you. Attend those men
Our pleasure?
They are, my lord, without the palace gate.
Bring them before us.	
To be thus is nothing,
But to be safely thus. Our fears in Banquo
Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature
Reigns that which would be feared. 'Tis much he
And to that dauntless temper of his mind
He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor
To act in safety. There is none but he
Whose being I do fear; and under him
My genius is rebuked, as it is said
Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters
When first they put the name of king upon me
And bade them speak to him. Then, prophet-like,
They hailed him father to a line of kings.
Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown
And put a barren scepter in my grip,
Thence to be wrenched with an unlineal hand,
No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so,
For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind;
For them the gracious Duncan have I murdered,
Put rancors in the vessel of my peace
Only for them, and mine eternal jewel
Given to the common enemy of man
To make them kings, the seeds of Banquo kings.
Rather than so, come fate into the list,
And champion me to th' utterance.--Who's there?
Was it not yesterday we spoke together?
It was, so please your Highness.
Have you considered of my speeches? Know
That it was he, in the times past, which held you
So under fortune, which you thought had been
Our innocent self. This I made good to you
In our last conference, passed in probation with you
How you were borne in hand, how crossed, the
Who wrought with them, and all things else that
To half a soul and to a notion crazed
Say "Thus did Banquo."
Our point of second meeting. Do you find
Your patience so predominant in your nature
That you can let this go? Are you so gospeled
To pray for this good man and for his issue,
Whose heavy hand hath bowed you to the grave
And beggared yours forever?
Ay, in the catalogue you go for men,
As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels,
Shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept
All by the name of dogs. The valued file
Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
The housekeeper, the hunter, every one
According to the gift which bounteous nature
Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive
Particular addition, from the bill
That writes them all alike. And so of men.
Now, if you have a station in the file,
Not i' th' worst rank of manhood, say 't,
And I will put that business in your bosoms
Whose execution takes your enemy off,
Grapples you to the heart and love of us,
Who wear our health but sickly in his life,
Which in his death were perfect.
Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
Hath so incensed that I am reckless what
So weary with disasters, tugged with fortune,
That I would set my life on any chance,
To mend it or be rid on 't.
Know Banquo was your enemy.
So is he mine, and in such bloody distance
That every minute of his being thrusts
Against my near'st of life. And though I could
With barefaced power sweep him from my sight
And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,
For certain friends that are both his and mine,
Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall
Who I myself struck down. And thence it is
That I to your assistance do make love,
Masking the business from the common eye
For sundry weighty reasons.
Perform what you command us.
Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at
Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' th' time,
The moment on 't, for 't must be done tonight
And something from the palace; always thought
That I require a clearness. And with him
Fleance, his son, that keeps him company,
Whose absence is no less material to me
Than is his father's, must embrace the fate
Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart.
It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul's flight,
If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.
Ay, madam, but returns again tonight.
Say to the King I would attend his leisure
For a few words.
Where our desire is got without content.
Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.
How now, my lord, why do you keep alone,
Of sorriest fancies your companions making,
Using those thoughts which should indeed have died
With them they think on? Things without all remedy
Should be without regard. What's done is done.
We have scorched the snake, not killed it.
She'll close and be herself whilst our poor malice
Remains in danger of her former tooth.
But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds
Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep
In the affliction of these terrible dreams
That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead,
Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,
Than on the torture of the mind to lie
In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave.
After life's fitful fever he sleeps well.
Treason has done his worst; nor steel nor poison,
Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing
Can touch him further.
Sleek o'er your rugged looks. Be bright and jovial
Among your guests tonight.
And so I pray be you. Let your remembrance
Apply to Banquo; present him eminence
Both with eye and tongue: unsafe the while that we
Must lave our honors in these flattering streams
And make our faces vizards to our hearts,
Disguising what they are.
Thou know'st that Banquo and his Fleance lives.
But in them nature's copy's not eterne.
There's comfort yet; they are assailable.
Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown
His cloistered flight, ere to black Hecate's summons
The shard-born beetle with his drowsy hums
Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
Till thou applaud the deed.--Come, seeling night,
Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day
And with thy bloody and invisible hand
Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond
Which keeps me pale. Light thickens, and the crow
Makes wing to th' rooky wood.
Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
Whiles night's black agents to their preys do
Thou marvel'st at my words, but hold thee still.
Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
So prithee go with me.
But who did bid thee join with us?
He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers
Our offices and what we have to do
To the direction just.
The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day.
Now spurs the lated traveler apace
To gain the timely inn, and near approaches
The subject of our watch.
That are within the note of expectation
Already are i' th' court.
Almost a mile; but he does usually
Make it their walk.
Thou mayst revenge--O slave!
Who did strike out the light?
Well, let's away and say how much is done.
Ross, Lennox, Lords, and Attendants.]
You know your own degrees; sit down. At first
And last, the hearty welcome.	
Ourself will mingle with society
And play the humble host.
Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time
We will require her welcome.
Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends,
For my heart speaks they are welcome.
See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks.
Both sides are even. Here I'll sit i' th' midst.
Be large in mirth. Anon we'll drink a measure
The table round.  There's
Is he dispatched?
My lord, his throat is cut. That I did for him.
Thou art the best o' th' cutthroats,
Yet he's good that did the like for Fleance.
If thou didst it, thou art the nonpareil.
Most royal sir, Fleance is 'scaped.
Then comes my fit again. I had else been perfect,
Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,
As broad and general as the casing air.
But now I am cabined, cribbed, confined, bound in
To saucy doubts and fears.--But Banquo's safe?
Ay, my good lord. Safe in a ditch he bides,
With twenty trenched gashes on his head,
The least a death to nature.
There the grown serpent lies. The worm that's fled
Hath nature that in time will venom breed,
No teeth for th' present. Get thee gone. Tomorrow
We'll hear ourselves again.	
You do not give the cheer. The feast is sold
That is not often vouched, while 'tis a-making,
From thence, the sauce to meat is ceremony;
Meeting were bare without it.
Now, good digestion wait on appetite
And health on both!
Here had we now our country's honor roofed,
Were the graced person of our Banquo present,
Who may I rather challenge for unkindness
Than pity for mischance.
Lays blame upon his promise. Please 't your
Highness
To grace us with your royal company?
The table's full.
Here, my good lord. What is 't that moves your
Highness?
Which of you have done this?
Thou canst not say I did it. Never shake
Thy gory locks at me.
Gentlemen, rise. His Highness is not well.
Sit, worthy friends. My lord is often thus
And hath been from his youth. Pray you, keep seat.
The fit is momentary; upon a thought
He will again be well. If much you note him
You shall offend him and extend his passion.
Feed and regard him not.	
Are you a man?
Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that
Which might appall the devil.
This is the very painting of your fear.
This is the air-drawn dagger which you said
Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts,
Impostors to true fear, would well become
Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!
Why do you make such faces? When all's done,
You look but on a stool.
Prithee, see there. Behold, look!  Lo,
Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.--
If charnel houses and our graves must send
Those that we bury back, our monuments
Shall be the maws of kites.	
If I stand here, I saw him.
Blood hath been shed ere now, i' th' olden time,
Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal;
Ay, and since too, murders have been performed
Too terrible for the ear. The time has been
That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
And there an end. But now they rise again
With twenty mortal murders on their crowns
And push us from our stools. This is more strange
Than such a murder is.
Your noble friends do lack you.
Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends.
To those that know me. Come, love and health to
Then I'll sit down.--Give me some wine. Fill full.
And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss.
Would he were here! To all, and him we thirst,
And all to all.
Avaunt, and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee.
Thy bones are marrowless; thy blood is cold;
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
Which thou dost glare with.
But as a thing of custom. 'Tis no other;
Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
The armed rhinoceros, or th' Hyrcan tiger;
Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble. Or be alive again
And dare me to the desert with thy sword.
If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!
Unreal mock'ry, hence!	
Why so, being gone,
You have displaced the mirth, broke the good
With most admired disorder.
And overcome us like a summer's cloud,
Without our special wonder? You make me strange
Even to the disposition that I owe
When now I think you can behold such sights
And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks
When mine is blanched with fear.
Question enrages him. At once, good night.
Stand not upon the order of your going,
But go at once.
Attend his Majesty.
It will have blood, they say; blood will have blood.
Stones have been known to move, and trees to
Augurs and understood relations have
By maggot pies and choughs and rooks brought
The secret'st man of blood.--What is the night?
Almost at odds with morning, which is which.
How say'st thou that Macduff denies his person
At our great bidding?
There's not a one of them but in his house
More shall they speak, for now I am bent to know
By the worst means the worst. For mine own good,
All causes shall give way. I am in blood
Stepped in so far that, should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o'er.
Strange things I have in head that will to hand,
Which must be acted ere they may be scanned.
You lack the season of all natures, sleep.
Come, we'll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse
Is the initiate fear that wants hard use.
We are yet but young in deed.
Why, how now, Hecate? You look angerly.
Have I not reason, beldams as you are?
Saucy and overbold, how did you dare
To trade and traffic with Macbeth
In riddles and affairs of death,
And I, the mistress of your charms,
The close contriver of all harms,
Was never called to bear my part
Or show the glory of our art?
And which is worse, all you have done
Hath been but for a wayward son,
Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do,
Loves for his own ends, not for you.
But make amends now. Get you gone,
And at the pit of Acheron
Meet me i' th' morning. Thither he
Will come to know his destiny.
Your vessels and your spells provide,
Your charms and everything beside.
Unto a dismal and a fatal end.
Great business must be wrought ere noon.
Upon the corner of the moon
There hangs a vap'rous drop profound.
And that, distilled by magic sleights,
Shall raise such artificial sprites
As by the strength of their illusion
Shall draw him on to his confusion.
He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear
His hopes 'bove wisdom, grace, and fear.
And you all know, security
Is mortals' chiefest enemy.
Hark! I am called. My little spirit, see,
Sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me.	
Come, let's make haste. She'll soon be back again.
My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
Which can interpret farther. Only I say
Things have been strangely borne. The gracious
Duncan
Was pitied of Macbeth; marry, he was dead.
And the right valiant Banquo walked too late,
Whom you may say, if 't please you, Fleance killed,
For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late.
Who cannot want the thought how monstrous
It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain
To kill their gracious father? Damned fact,
How it did grieve Macbeth! Did he not straight
In pious rage the two delinquents tear
That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely, too,
For 'twould have angered any heart alive
To hear the men deny 't. So that I say
He has borne all things well. And I do think
That had he Duncan's sons under his key
What 'twere to kill a father. So should Fleance.
But peace. For from broad words, and 'cause he
His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear
Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
Where he bestows himself?
Lives in the English court and is received
Of the most pious Edward with such grace
That the malevolence of fortune nothing
Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff
Is gone to pray the holy king upon his aid
To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward
That, by the help of these (with Him above
To ratify the work), we may again
Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights,
Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,
Do faithful homage, and receive free honors,
All which we pine for now. And this report
Hath so exasperate the King that he
Prepares for some attempt of war.
He did, and with an absolute "Sir, not I,"
The cloudy messenger turns me his back
And hums, as who should say "You'll rue the time
That clogs me with this answer."
Advise him to a caution t' hold what distance
His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel
Fly to the court of England and unfold
His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
May soon return to this our suffering country
Under a hand accursed.
Thrice the brinded cat hath mewed.
Thrice, and once the hedge-pig whined.
Harpier cries "'Tis time, 'tis time!"
Round about the cauldron go;
In the poisoned entrails throw.
Toad, that under cold stone
Days and nights has thirty-one
Sweltered venom sleeping got,
Boil thou first i' th' charmed pot.
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
Fillet of a fenny snake
In the cauldron boil and bake.
Eye of newt and toe of frog,
Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
Adder's fork and blindworm's sting,
Lizard's leg and howlet's wing,
For a charm of powerful trouble,
Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
Witch's mummy, maw and gulf
Of the ravined salt-sea shark,
Root of hemlock digged i' th' dark,
Liver of blaspheming Jew,
Gall of goat and slips of yew
Slivered in the moon's eclipse,
Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips,
Finger of birth-strangled babe
Ditch-delivered by a drab,
Make the gruel thick and slab.
Add thereto a tiger's chaudron
For th' ingredience of our cauldron.
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
Cool it with a baboon's blood.
Then the charm is firm and good.
And everyone shall share i' th' gains.
And now about the cauldron sing
Like elves and fairies in a ring,
Enchanting all that you put in.
By the pricking of my thumbs,
Something wicked this way comes.
Open, locks,
Whoever knocks.
How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags?
What is 't you do?
Though you untie the winds and let them fight
Against the churches, though the yeasty waves
Confound and swallow navigation up,
Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown
Though castles topple on their warders' heads,
Though palaces and pyramids do slope
Their heads to their foundations, though the
Of nature's germens tumble all together
Even till destruction sicken, answer me
To what I ask you.
Say if th' hadst rather hear it from our mouths
Or from our masters'.
Pour in sow's blood that hath eaten
Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten
From the murderers' gibbet throw
Into the flame.
Thyself and office deftly show.
Tell me, thou unknown power--
Hear his speech but say thou naught.
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Beware Macduff!
Beware the Thane of Fife! Dismiss me. Enough.
Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks.
Thou hast harped my fear aright. But one word
He will not be commanded. Here's another
More potent than the first.
Be bloody, bold, and resolute. Laugh to scorn
The power of man, for none of woman born
Shall harm Macbeth.	
Then live, Macduff; what need I fear of thee?
But yet I'll make assurance double sure
And take a bond of fate. Thou shalt not live,
That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,
And sleep in spite of thunder.
What is this
That rises like the issue of a king
And wears upon his baby brow the round
And top of sovereignty?
Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care
Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are.
Macbeth shall never vanquished be until
Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill
Shall come against him.	
Who can impress the forest, bid the tree
Unfix his earthbound root? Sweet bodements, good!
Rebellious dead, rise never till the Wood
Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth
Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart
Throbs to know one thing. Tell me, if your art
Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever
Reign in this kingdom?
And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know!
Why sinks that cauldron? And what noise is this?
Show his eyes and grieve his heart.
Come like shadows; so depart.
Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo. Down!
Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs. And thy hair,
Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
Why do you show me this?--A fourth? Start, eyes!
What, will the line stretch out to th' crack of doom?
Another yet? A seventh? I'll see no more.
And yet the eighth appears who bears a glass
Which shows me many more, and some I see
That twofold balls and treble scepters carry.
Horrible sight! Now I see 'tis true,
For the blood-boltered Banquo smiles upon me
And points at them for his.
What, is this so?
Ay, sir, all this is so. But why
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?
Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites
And show the best of our delights.
While you perform your antic round,
That this great king may kindly say
Our duties did his welcome pay.
Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour
Stand aye accursed in the calendar!--
Come in, without there.
Saw you the Weird Sisters?
Came they not by you?
Infected be the air whereon they ride,
And damned all those that trust them! I did hear
The galloping of horse. Who was 't came by?
Macduff is fled to England.
Time, thou anticipat'st my dread exploits.
The flighty purpose never is o'ertook
Unless the deed go with it. From this moment
The very firstlings of my heart shall be
The firstlings of my hand. And even now,
To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and
The castle of Macduff I will surprise,
Seize upon Fife, give to th' edge o' th' sword
His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls
That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool;
This deed I'll do before this purpose cool.
But no more sights!--Where are these gentlemen?
Come bring me where they are.
What had he done to make him fly the land?
You must have patience, madam.
His flight was madness. When our actions do not,
Our fears do make us traitors.
Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.
Wisdom? To leave his wife, to leave his babes,
His mansion and his titles in a place
From whence himself does fly? He loves us not;
He wants the natural touch; for the poor wren,
The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
All is the fear, and nothing is the love,
As little is the wisdom, where the flight
So runs against all reason.
He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows
The fits o' th' season. I dare not speak much
But cruel are the times when we are traitors
And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumor
From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,
But float upon a wild and violent sea
Each way and move--I take my leave of you.
Shall not be long but I'll be here again.
Things at the worst will cease or else climb upward
To what they were before.--My pretty cousin,
Blessing upon you.
Fathered he is, and yet he's fatherless.
It would be my disgrace and your discomfort.
And what will you do now? How will you live?
As birds do, mother.
With what I get, I mean; and so do they.
Poor bird, thou 'dst never fear the net nor lime,
The pitfall nor the gin.
Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set
My father is not dead, for all your saying.
Yes, he is dead. How wilt thou do for a father?
Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.
And yet, i' faith, with wit enough for thee.
Bless you, fair dame. I am not to you known,
Though in your state of honor I am perfect.
If you will take a homely man's advice,
Be not found here. Hence with your little ones!
To fright you thus methinks I am too savage;
To do worse to you were fell cruelty,
Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve
Is often laudable, to do good sometime
Accounted dangerous folly. Why then, alas,
Do I put up that womanly defense
To say I have done no harm?
What are these faces?
Where such as thou mayst find him.
Thou liest, thou shag-eared villain!
Run away, I pray you.
Murderers bearing the Son's body.]
Let us seek out some desolate shade and there
Weep our sad bosoms empty.
Hold fast the mortal sword and, like good men,
Bestride our downfall'n birthdom. Each new morn
New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows
Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
As if it felt with Scotland, and yelled out
Like syllable of dolor.
What know, believe; and what I can redress,
As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
What you have spoke, it may be so, perchance.
This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
Was once thought honest. You have loved him well.
He hath not touched you yet. I am young, but
You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom
To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb
In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your
That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose.
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.
Though all things foul would wear the brows of
Yet grace must still look so.
Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
Why in that rawness left you wife and child,
Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
Without leave-taking? I pray you,
Let not my jealousies be your dishonors,
But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just,
Whatever I shall think.
Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,
For goodness dare not check thee. Wear thou thy
The title is affeered.--Fare thee well, lord.
For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp,
And the rich East to boot.
It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
Is added to her wounds. I think withal
There would be hands uplifted in my right;
And here from gracious England have I offer
Of goodly thousands. But, for all this,
When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head
Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
Shall have more vices than it had before,
More suffer, and more sundry ways than ever,
By him that shall succeed.
It is myself I mean, in whom I know
All the particulars of vice so grafted
That, when they shall be opened, black Macbeth
Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state
Esteem him as a lamb, being compared
With my confineless harms.
Of horrid hell can come a devil more damned
In evils to top Macbeth.
Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,
Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin
That has a name. But there's no bottom, none,
In my voluptuousness. Your wives, your daughters,
Your matrons, and your maids could not fill up
The cistern of my lust, and my desire
All continent impediments would o'erbear
That did oppose my will. Better Macbeth
Than such an one to reign.
In nature is a tyranny. It hath been
Th' untimely emptying of the happy throne
And fall of many kings. But fear not yet
To take upon you what is yours. You may
Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty
And yet seem cold--the time you may so hoodwink.
We have willing dames enough. There cannot be
That vulture in you to devour so many
As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
Finding it so inclined.
In my most ill-composed affection such
Desire his jewels, and this other's house;
And my more-having would be as a sauce
To make me hunger more, that I should forge
Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
Destroying them for wealth.
Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root
Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been
The sword of our slain kings. Yet do not fear.
Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will
Of your mere own. All these are portable,
With other graces weighed.
But I have none. The king-becoming graces,
As justice, verity, temp'rance, stableness,
Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
In the division of each several crime,
Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should
Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
Uproar the universal peace, confound
All unity on earth.
If such a one be fit to govern, speak.
No, not to live.--O nation miserable,
With an untitled tyrant bloody-sceptered,
When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,
Since that the truest issue of thy throne
By his own interdiction stands accursed
And does blaspheme his breed?--Thy royal father
Was a most sainted king. The queen that bore thee,
Oft'ner upon her knees than on her feet,
Died every day she lived. Fare thee well.
These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself
Hath banished me from Scotland.--O my breast,
Thy hope ends here!
Child of integrity, hath from my soul
Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts
To thy good truth and honor. Devilish Macbeth
By many of these trains hath sought to win me
Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me
From overcredulous haste. But God above
Deal between thee and me, for even now
Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure
The taints and blames I laid upon myself
For strangers to my nature. I am yet
Unknown to woman, never was forsworn,
Scarcely have coveted what was mine own,
At no time broke my faith, would not betray
The devil to his fellow, and delight
No less in truth than life. My first false speaking
Was this upon myself. What I am truly
Is thine and my poor country's to command--
Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,
Old Siward with ten thousand warlike men,
Already at a point, was setting forth.
Now we'll together, and the chance of goodness
Be like our warranted quarrel. Why are you silent?
Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
Comes the King forth, I pray you?
Ay, sir. There are a crew of wretched souls
That stay his cure. Their malady convinces
The great assay of art, but at his touch
They presently amend.
What's the disease he means?
Which often since my here-remain in England
Himself best knows, but strangely visited people
All swoll'n and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
The mere despair of surgery, he cures,
Hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
Put on with holy prayers; and, 'tis spoken,
To the succeeding royalty he leaves
The healing benediction. With this strange virtue,
He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy,
And sundry blessings hang about his throne
That speak him full of grace.
My countryman, but yet I know him not.
My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.
The means that makes us strangers!
Stands Scotland where it did?
Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot
Be called our mother, but our grave, where nothing
But who knows nothing is once seen to smile;
Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rent the air
Are made, not marked; where violent sorrow seems
Is there scarce asked for who, and good men's lives
Expire before the flowers in their caps,
Dying or ere they sicken.
That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker.
Each minute teems a new one.
The tyrant has not battered at their peace?
No, they were well at peace when I did leave 'em.
Be not a niggard of your speech. How goes 't?
When I came hither to transport the tidings
Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumor
Of many worthy fellows that were out;
Which was to my belief witnessed the rather
For that I saw the tyrant's power afoot.
Now is the time of help. Your eye in Scotland
Would create soldiers, make our women fight
To doff their dire distresses.
We are coming thither. Gracious England hath
Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men;
An older and a better soldier none
That Christendom gives out.
This comfort with the like. But I have words
That would be howled out in the desert air,
Where hearing should not latch them.
The general cause, or is it a fee-grief
Due to some single breast?
But in it shares some woe, though the main part
Pertains to you alone.
Keep it not from me. Quickly let me have it.
Let not your ears despise my tongue forever,
Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
That ever yet they heard.
Your castle is surprised, your wife and babes
Savagely slaughtered. To relate the manner
Were on the quarry of these murdered deer
To add the death of you.
What, man, ne'er pull your hat upon your brows.
Give sorrow words. The grief that does not speak
Whispers the o'erfraught heart and bids it break.
Wife, children, servants, all that could be found.
And I must be from thence? My wife killed too?
Let's make us med'cines of our great revenge
To cure this deadly grief.
He has no children. All my pretty ones?
Did you say "all"? O hell-kite! All?
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
At one fell swoop?
But I must also feel it as a man.
That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on
And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am,
Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now.
Be this the whetstone of your sword. Let grief
Convert to anger. Blunt not the heart; enrage it.
And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,
Cut short all intermission! Front to front
Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself.
Within my sword's length set him. If he 'scape,
Heaven forgive him too.
Come, go we to the King. Our power is ready;
Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth
Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you
The night is long that never finds the day.
Lo you, here she comes. This is her very guise and,
Why then, 'tis time to do 't. Hell is murky. Fie, my
Look not so pale. I tell you yet again, Banquo's
Foul whisp'rings are abroad. Unnatural deeds
Do breed unnatural troubles. Infected minds
To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets.
More needs she the divine than the physician.
God, God forgive us all. Look after her.
Remove from her the means of all annoyance
And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night.
My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight.
Lennox, and Soldiers.]
The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
His uncle Siward, and the good Macduff.
Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes
Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
Excite the mortified man.
Shall we well meet them. That way are they coming.
Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?
For certain, sir, he is not. I have a file
Of all the gentry. There is Siward's son
And many unrough youths that even now
Protest their first of manhood.
Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies.
Some say he's mad; others that lesser hate him
Do call it valiant fury. But for certain
He cannot buckle his distempered cause
Within the belt of rule.
His secret murders sticking on his hands.
Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach.
Those he commands move only in command,
Nothing in love. Now does he feel his title
Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe
Upon a dwarfish thief.
His pestered senses to recoil and start
When all that is within him does condemn
Itself for being there?
To give obedience where 'tis truly owed.
Meet we the med'cine of the sickly weal,
And with him pour we in our country's purge
Each drop of us.
To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.
Make we our march towards Birnam.
Bring me no more reports. Let them fly all.
Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane
Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know
All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus:
Shall e'er have power upon thee." Then fly, false
And mingle with the English epicures.
The mind I sway by and the heart I bear
Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.
The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!
Where got'st thou that goose-look?
Go prick thy face and over-red thy fear,
Thou lily-livered boy. What soldiers, patch?
Death of thy soul! Those linen cheeks of thine
Are counselors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?
Take thy face hence.	
Seyton!--I am sick at heart
When I behold--Seyton, I say!--This push
Will cheer me ever or disseat me now.
Is fall'n into the sere, the yellow leaf,
And that which should accompany old age,
As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,
Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath
Which the poor heart would fain deny and dare
Seyton!
What's your gracious pleasure?
All is confirmed, my lord, which was reported.
Give me my armor.
Send out more horses. Skirr the country round.
Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine
How does your patient, doctor?
As she is troubled with thick-coming fancies
That keep her from her rest.
Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
And with some sweet oblivious antidote
Cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart?
Must minister to himself.
Throw physic to the dogs. I'll none of it.--
Come, put mine armor on. Give me my staff.
Seyton, send out.--Doctor, the thanes fly from
Come, sir, dispatch.--If thou couldst, doctor, cast
The water of my land, find her disease,
And purge it to a sound and pristine health,
That should applaud again.--Pull 't off, I say.--
What rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug
Would scour these English hence? Hear'st thou of
Ay, my good lord. Your royal preparation
Makes us hear something.
Till Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane.
Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,
Profit again should hardly draw me here.
Siward's son, Menteith, Caithness, Angus, and Soldiers,
Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
That chambers will be safe.
What wood is this before us?
Let every soldier hew him down a bough
And bear 't before him. Thereby shall we shadow
The numbers of our host and make discovery
Err in report of us.
We learn no other but the confident tyrant
Keeps still in Dunsinane and will endure
Our setting down before 't.
For, where there is advantage to be given,
Both more and less have given him the revolt,
And none serve with him but constrained things
Whose hearts are absent too.
Attend the true event, and put we on
Industrious soldiership.
That will with due decision make us know
What we shall say we have and what we owe.
Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,
But certain issue strokes must arbitrate;
Towards which, advance the war.
Colors.]
Hang out our banners on the outward walls.
The cry is still "They come!" Our castle's strength
Will laugh a siege to scorn. Here let them lie
Till famine and the ague eat them up.
Were they not forced with those that should be
We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
And beat them backward home.
What is that noise?
It is the cry of women, my good lord.	
The time has been my senses would have cooled
To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair
Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
As life were in 't. I have supped full with horrors.
Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts,
Cannot once start me.
Wherefore was that cry?
There would have been a time for such a word.
Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
To the last syllable of recorded time,
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
And then is heard no more. It is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.
Thou com'st to use thy tongue: thy story quickly.
But know not how to do 't.
As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
The Wood began to move.
Let me endure your wrath if 't be not so.
Within this three mile may you see it coming.
Upon the next tree shall thou hang alive
Till famine cling thee. If thy speech be sooth,
To doubt th' equivocation of the fiend,
That lies like truth. "Fear not till Birnam Wood
Do come to Dunsinane," and now a wood
Comes toward Dunsinane.--Arm, arm, and out!--
If this which he avouches does appear,
There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.
And wish th' estate o' th' world were now
Ring the alarum bell!--Blow wind, come wrack,
At least we'll die with harness on our back.
Now near enough. Your leafy screens throw down
And show like those you are.--You, worthy uncle,
Shall with my cousin, your right noble son,
Lead our first battle. Worthy Macduff and we
Shall take upon 's what else remains to do,
According to our order.
Do we but find the tyrant's power tonight,
Let us be beaten if we cannot fight.
Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath,
Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
They have tied me to a stake. I cannot fly,
But, bear-like, I must fight the course. What's he
That was not born of woman? Such a one
Am I to fear, or none.
No, though thou call'st thyself a hotter name
Than any is in hell.
The devil himself could not pronounce a title
More hateful to mine ear.
Thou liest, abhorred tyrant. With my sword
But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
Brandished by man that's of a woman born.
That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!
If thou beest slain, and with no stroke of mine,
My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.
Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth,
Or else my sword with an unbattered edge
By this great clatter, one of greatest note
Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune,
And more I beg not.	
This way, my lord. The castle's gently rendered.
The tyrant's people on both sides do fight,
The noble thanes do bravely in the war,
The day almost itself professes yours,
And little is to do.
That strike beside us.
Why should I play the Roman fool and die
On mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes
Do better upon them.
Of all men else I have avoided thee.
But get thee back. My soul is too much charged
With blood of thine already.
My voice is in my sword, thou bloodier villain
Than terms can give thee out.	
As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed.
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;
To one of woman born.
And let the angel whom thou still hast served
Tell thee Macduff was from his mother's womb
Untimely ripped.
Accursed be that tongue that tells me so,
For it hath cowed my better part of man!
And be these juggling fiends no more believed
That palter with us in a double sense,
That keep the word of promise to our ear
And break it to our hope. I'll not fight with thee.
And live to be the show and gaze o' th' time.
We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
Painted upon a pole, and underwrit
To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet
And to be baited with the rabble's curse.
Though Birnam Wood be come to Dunsinane
And thou opposed, being of no woman born,
Yet I will try the last. Before my body
And damned be him that first cries "Hold! Enough!"
Enter, with Drum and Colors, Malcolm, Siward, Ross,
Thanes, and Soldiers.]
Some must go off; and yet by these I see
So great a day as this is cheaply bought.
Macduff is missing, and your noble son.
Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt.
He only lived but till he was a man,
The which no sooner had his prowess confirmed
In the unshrinking station where he fought,
But like a man he died.
Ay, and brought off the field. Your cause of sorrow
Must not be measured by his worth, for then
It hath no end.
Ay, on the front.
Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
And so his knell is knolled.
He's worth more sorrow, and that I'll spend for
They say he parted well and paid his score,
And so, God be with him. Here comes newer
Hail, King! for so thou art. Behold where stands
Th' usurper's cursed head. The time is free.
That speak my salutation in their minds,
Whose voices I desire aloud with mine.
Hail, King of Scotland!
We shall not spend a large expense of time
Before we reckon with your several loves
And make us even with you. My thanes and
Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland
In such an honor named. What's more to do,
Which would be planted newly with the time,
As calling home our exiled friends abroad
That fled the snares of watchful tyranny,
Producing forth the cruel ministers
Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen
Took off her life)--this, and what needful else
That calls upon us, by the grace of grace,
We will perform in measure, time, and place.
So thanks to all at once and to each one,
Whom we invite to see us crowned at Scone.
It wears, sir, as it grows.
But what particular rarity, what strange,
Which manifold record not matches? See,
Magic of bounty, all these spirits thy power
Hath conjured to attend. I know the merchant.
To an untirable and continuate goodness.
He passes.
If he will touch the estimate. But for that--
When we for recompense have praised the vile,
It stains the glory in that happy verse
Which aptly sings the good.
You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedication
To the great lord.
Our poesy is as a gum which oozes
From whence 'tis nourished. The fire i' th' flint
Shows not till it be struck; our gentle flame
Provokes itself and, like the current, flies
Each bound it chases. What have you there?
Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.
Let's see your piece.
So 'tis. This comes off well and excellent.
Indifferent.
Speaks his own standing! What a mental power
This eye shoots forth! How big imagination
Moves in this lip! To th' dumbness of the gesture
One might interpret.
It is a pretty mocking of the life.
Here is a touch. Is 't good?
It tutors nature. Artificial strife
Lives in these touches livelier than life.
The senators of Athens, happy men.
You see this confluence, this great flood of visitors.
Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug
With amplest entertainment. My free drift
Halts not particularly but moves itself
In a wide sea of wax. No leveled malice
Infects one comma in the course I hold,
But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on,
Leaving no tract behind.
You see how all conditions, how all minds,
As well of glib and slipp'ry creatures as
Of grave and austere quality, tender down
Their services to Lord Timon. His large fortune,
Upon his good and gracious nature hanging,
Subdues and properties to his love and tendance
All sorts of hearts--yea, from the glass-faced flatterer
To Apemantus, that few things loves better
Than to abhor himself; even he drops down
The knee before him and returns in peace
Most rich in Timon's nod.
Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill
Feigned Fortune to be throned. The base o' th' mount
Is ranked with all deserts, all kind of natures
That labor on the bosom of this sphere
To propagate their states. Amongst them all
Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fixed,
One do I personate of Lord Timon's frame,
Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her,
Whose present grace to present slaves and servants
Translates his rivals.
This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks,
With one man beckoned from the rest below,
Bowing his head against the steepy mount
To climb his happiness, would be well expressed
In our condition.
All those which were his fellows but of late,
Some better than his value, on the moment
Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance,
Rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear,
Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him
Drink the free air.
When Fortune in her shift and change of mood
Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants,
Which labored after him to the mountain's top
Even on their knees and hands, let him slip down,
Not one accompanying his declining foot.
That shall demonstrate these quick blows of
Fortune's
More pregnantly than words. Yet you do well
To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen
The foot above the head.
Messenger and followed by Lucilius and other
Servants.]
Ay, my good lord. Five talents is his debt,
His means most short, his creditors most strait.
Your honorable letter he desires
To those have shut him up, which failing
Periods his comfort.
My friend when he must need me. I do know him
Which he shall have. I'll pay the debt and free him.
Commend me to him. I will send his ransom;
And, being enfranchised, bid him come to me.
But to support him after. Fare you well.
Lord Timon, hear me speak.
Thou hast a servant named Lucilius.
Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.
Attends he here or no?--Lucilius!
This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature,
By night frequents my house. I am a man
That from my first have been inclined to thrift,
And my estate deserves an heir more raised
Than one which holds a trencher.
One only daughter have I, no kin else
On whom I may confer what I have got.
The maid is fair, o' th' youngest for a bride,
And I have bred her at my dearest cost
In qualities of the best. This man of thine
Attempts her love. I prithee, noble lord,
Join with me to forbid him her resort.
Myself have spoke in vain.
His honesty rewards him in itself;
It must not bear my daughter.
Our own precedent passions do instruct us
What levity's in youth.
Ay, my good lord, and she accepts of it.
If in her marriage my consent be missing--
Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world
And dispossess her all.
If she be mated with an equal husband?
Three talents on the present; in future, all.
This gentleman of mine hath served me long.
To build his fortune, I will strain a little,
For 'tis a bond in men. Give him thy daughter.
What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise,
And make him weigh with her.
Pawn me to this your honor, she is his.
My hand to thee; mine honor on my promise.
Humbly I thank your Lordship. Never may
That state or fortune fall into my keeping
Which is not owed to you.
Vouchsafe my labor, and long live your Lordship.
Go not away.--What have you there, my friend?
Your Lordship to accept.
The painting is almost the natural man,
For, since dishonor traffics with man's nature,
He is but outside; these penciled figures are
Even such as they give out. I like your work,
And you shall find I like it. Wait attendance
Till you hear further from me.
Well fare you, gentleman. Give me your hand.
We must needs dine together.--Sir, your jewel
Hath suffered under praise.
If I should pay you for 't as 'tis extolled,
It would unclew me quite.
As those which sell would give. But you well know
Things of like value, differing in the owners,
Are prized by their masters. Believe 't, dear lord,
You mend the jewel by the wearing it.
No, my good lord. He speaks the common tongue,
Which all men speak with him.
Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus.
Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow--
When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.
Why dost thou call them knaves? Thou know'st
Timon.
All of companionship.
Pray, entertain them. Give them guide to us.
You must needs dine with me. Go not you hence
Till I have thanked you.--When dinner's done
Show me this piece.--I am joyful of your sights.
Most welcome, sir.	
Aches contract and starve your supple joints!
That there should be small love amongst these sweet
And all this courtesy! The strain of man's bred out
Into baboon and monkey.
Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed
Most hungerly on your sight.
Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous time
In different pleasures. Pray you, let us in.
The most accursed thou, that still omit'st it.
Ay, to see meat fill knaves, and wine heat fools.
Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.
Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean to give
No, I will do nothing at thy bidding.
Make thy requests to thy friend.
Away, unpeaceable dog, or I'll spurn thee hence.
He's opposite to humanity. Come, shall we in
And taste Lord Timon's bounty? He outgoes
The very heart of kindness.
He pours it out. Plutus, the god of gold,
Is but his steward. No meed but he repays
Sevenfold above itself. No gift to him
But breeds the giver a return exceeding
All use of quittance.
That ever governed man.
Long may he live in fortunes. Shall we in?
Lords , Alcibiades, and Ventidius
Apemantus discontentedly like himself.]
It hath pleased the gods to remember my father's age
And call him to long peace.
He is gone happy and has left me rich.
Then, as in grateful virtue I am bound
To your free heart, I do return those talents,
Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help
Honest Ventidius. You mistake my love.
Can truly say he gives if he receives.
If our betters play at that game, we must not dare
To imitate them. Faults that are rich are fair.
Nay, my lords, ceremony was but devised at first
To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,
Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown;
But where there is true friendship, there needs none.
Pray, sit. More welcome are you to my fortunes
Than my fortunes to me.	
Ho, ho, "confessed it"? Hanged it, have you not?
Fie, thou 'rt a churl. You've got a humor there
Does not become a man. 'Tis much to blame.--
They say, my lords, Ira furor brevis est, but yond
Methinks they should invite them without knives.
Good for their meat, and safer for their lives.
There's much example for 't. The fellow that sits
Lest they should spy my wind-pipe's dangerous
Great men should drink with harness on their
My lord, in heart! And let the health go round.
He keeps his tides well. Those healths will make
Here's that which is too weak to be a sinner,
Honest water, which ne'er left man i' th' mire.
This and my food are equals. There's no odds.
Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.
Apemantus' grace.
Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus!
Why have you that charitable title from thousands,
Timon.
Joy had the like conception in our eyes
And, at that instant, like a babe sprung up.
Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.
How now?
Hail to thee, worthy Timon, and to all
That of his bounties taste! The five best senses
Acknowledge thee their patron, and come freely
To gratulate thy plenteous bosom. There
Taste, touch, all, pleased from thy table rise;
They only now come but to feast thine eyes.
They're welcome all. Let 'em have kind admittance.
Music, make their welcome!
You see, my lord, how ample you're beloved.
What a sweep of vanity comes this way.
They dance? They are madwomen.
Like madness is the glory of this life
As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.
We make ourselves fools to disport ourselves
And spend our flatteries to drink those men
Upon whose age we void it up again
With poisonous spite and envy.
Who lives that's not depraved or depraves?
Who dies that bears not one spurn to their graves
Of their friends' gift?
Would one day stamp upon me. 'T 'as been done.
Men shut their doors against a setting sun.
You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies,
Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,
Which was not half so beautiful and kind.
You have added worth unto 't and luster,
And entertained me with mine own device.
My lord, you take us even at the best.
Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you.
Please you to dispose yourselves.
My lord?
There is no crossing him in 's humor;
Else I should tell him well, i' faith I should.
When all's spent, he'd be crossed then, an he could.
That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.
Our horses.
To say to you. Look you, my good lord,
As to advance this jewel. Accept it and wear it,
Kind my lord.
My lord, there are certain nobles of the Senate
Newly alighted and come to visit you.
They are fairly welcome.	
Vouchsafe me a word. It does concern you near.
Near? Why, then, another time I'll hear thee.
May it please your Honor, Lord Lucius,
Out of his free love, hath presented to you
Four milk-white horses trapped in silver.
Be worthily entertained.	
How now? What news?
Honor two brace of greyhounds.
Not without fair reward.	
He commands us to provide, and give great gifts,
And all out of an empty coffer.
Nor will he know his purse or yield me this--
To show him what a beggar his heart is,
Being of no power to make his wishes good.
His promises fly so beyond his state
That what he speaks is all in debt; he owes
For ev'ry word. He is so kind that he
Now pays interest for 't. His land's put to their books.
Well, would I were gently put out of office
Before I were forced out.
Happier is he that has no friend to feed
Than such that do e'en enemies exceed.
You bate too much of your own merits.
With more than common thanks I will receive it.
You may take my word, my lord. I know no man
Can justly praise but what he does affect.
So kind to heart, 'tis not enough to give.
Methinks I could deal kingdoms to my friends
And ne'er be weary.--Alcibiades,
Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich.
It comes in charity to thee, for all thy living
Is 'mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast
Lie in a pitched field.
The best of happiness, honor, and fortunes
Keep with you, Lord Timon.
Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums!
That are given for 'em. Friendship's full of dregs.
Methinks false hearts should never have sound legs.
Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on court'sies.
Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen,
To counsel deaf, but not to flattery!
And late five thousand. To Varro and to Isidore
He owes nine thousand, besides my former sum,
Which makes it five-and-twenty. Still in motion
Of raging waste! It cannot hold; it will not.
If I want gold, steal but a beggar's dog
And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold.
If I would sell my horse and buy twenty more
Better than he, why, give my horse to Timon--
Ask nothing; give it him--it foals me straight,
And able horses. No porter at his gate
But rather one that smiles and still invites
All that pass by. It cannot hold. No reason
Can sound his state in safety.--Caphis, ho!
Caphis, I say!
Get on your cloak and haste you to Lord Timon.
Importune him for my moneys. Be not ceased
With slight denial, nor then silenced when
Plays in the right hand thus; but tell him
My uses cry to me. I must serve my turn
Out of mine own. His days and times are past,
And my reliances on his fracted dates
Have smit my credit. I love and honor him
But must not break my back to heal his finger.
Immediate are my needs, and my relief
Must not be tossed and turned to me in words
But find supply immediate. Get you gone.
Put on a most importunate aspect,
When every feather sticks in his own wing
Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
Which flashes now a phoenix. Get you gone.
And have the dates in. Come.
No care, no stop, so senseless of expense
That he will neither know how to maintain it
Nor cease his flow of riot. Takes no account
How things go from him nor resumes no care
Of what is to continue. Never mind
Was to be so unwise to be so kind.
What shall be done? He will not hear till feel.
Fie, fie, fie, fie!
Good even, Varro. What, you come for money?
So soon as dinner's done we'll forth again,
My Alcibiades.  With me? What is your
My lord, here is a note of certain dues.
Please it your Lordship, he hath put me off
To the succession of new days this month.
My master is awaked by great occasion
To call upon his own and humbly prays you
That with your other noble parts you'll suit
In giving him his right.
Nay, good my lord--
From Isidore. He humbly prays your speedy
If you did know, my lord, my master's wants--
Your steward puts me off, my lord, and I
Am sent expressly to your Lordship.
How goes the world that I am thus encountered
With clamorous demands of debt, broken bonds,
And the detention of long-since-due debts
Against my honor?
The time is unagreeable to this business.
Your importunacy cease till after dinner,
That I may make his Lordship understand
Wherefore you are not paid.
See them well entertained.
Let's ha' some sport with 'em.
Alcibiades. Go. Thou wast born a bastard, and
My mistress is one, and I am her Fool. When men
Pray you, walk near. I'll speak with you anon.
You make me marvel wherefore ere this time
Had you not fully laid my state before me,
That I might so have rated my expense
As I had leave of means.
At many leisures I proposed--
Perchance some single vantages you took
When my indisposition put you back,
And that unaptness made your minister
Thus to excuse yourself.
At many times I brought in my accounts,
Laid them before you. You would throw them off
And say you found them in mine honesty.
When for some trifling present you have bid me
Return so much, I have shook my head and wept--
Yea, 'gainst th' authority of manners prayed you
To hold your hand more close. I did endure
Not seldom nor no slight checks when I have
Prompted you in the ebb of your estate
And your great flow of debts. My loved lord,
Though you hear now too late, yet now's a time.
The greatest of your having lacks a half
To pay your present debts.
And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
Of present dues. The future comes apace.
What shall defend the interim? And at length
How goes our reck'ning?
To Lacedaemon did my land extend.
Were it all yours to give it in a breath,
How quickly were it gone!
If you suspect my husbandry of falsehood,
Call me before th' exactest auditors,
And set me on the proof. So the gods bless me,
When all our offices have been oppressed
With riotous feeders, when our vaults have wept
With drunken spilth of wine, when every room
Hath blazed with lights and brayed with minstrelsy,
And set mine eyes at flow.
Heavens, have I said, the bounty of this lord!
How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants
This night englutted. Who is not Timon's?
What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is Lord
Timon's?
Great Timon, noble, worthy, royal Timon!
Ah, when the means are gone that buy this praise,
The breath is gone whereof this praise is made.
Feast-won, fast-lost. One cloud of winter showers,
These flies are couched.
No villainous bounty yet hath passed my heart;
Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.
Why dost thou weep? Canst thou the conscience lack
To think I shall lack friends? Secure thy heart.
If I would broach the vessels of my love
And try the argument of hearts by borrowing,
Men and men's fortunes could I frankly use
As I can bid thee speak.
And in some sort these wants of mine are crowned,
That I account them blessings. For by these
Shall I try friends. You shall perceive how you
Mistake my fortunes. I am wealthy in my friends.--
Within there! Flaminius!--Servilius!
You to Lord Lucius,  to Lord
Lucullus you--I hunted with his Honor today; 
Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have
Deserved this hearing. Bid 'em send o' th' instant
For that I knew it the most general way--
To them to use your signet and your name,
But they do shake their heads, and I am here
No richer in return.
They answer in a joint and corporate voice
That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot
Do what they would, are sorry. You are honorable,
But yet they could have wished--they know not--
Something hath been amiss--a noble nature
May catch a wrench--would all were well--'tis pity.
And so, intending other serious matters,
After distasteful looks and these hard fractions,
With certain half-caps and cold-moving nods
They froze me into silence.
Prithee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows
Have their ingratitude in them hereditary.
Their blood is caked, 'tis cold, it seldom flows;
And nature, as it grows again toward earth,
Is fashioned for the journey, dull and heavy.
Go to Ventidius. Prithee, be not sad.
Thou art true and honest--ingeniously I speak--
No blame belongs to thee. Ventidius lately
Buried his father, by whose death he's stepped
Into a great estate. When he was poor,
Imprisoned, and in scarcity of friends,
Bid him suppose some good necessity
Touches his friend, which craves to be remembered
With those five talents. That had, give 't these fellows
To whom 'tis instant due. Ne'er speak or think
That Timon's fortunes 'mong his friends can sink.
That thought is bounty's foe;
Being free itself, it thinks all others so.
Flaminius, you are very respectively welcome, sir.
And how does that honorable, complete, free-hearted
And what hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty
Flaminius?
Alas, good lord! A noble gentleman 'tis, if he would
Here's to thee.	
Draw nearer, honest Flaminius. Thy lord's a bountiful
Is 't possible the world should so much differ,
And we alive that lived? Fly, damned baseness,
To him that worships thee!
May these add to the number that may scald thee!
Let molten coin be thy damnation,
Thou disease of a friend and not himself!
Has friendship such a faint and milky heart
It turns in less than two nights? O you gods,
Unto his honor has my lord's meat in him.
Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment
When he is turned to poison?
And when he's sick to death, let not that part of
Which my lord paid for be of any power
To expel sickness, but prolong his hour.
Lucullus to borrow fifty talents, nay, urged
He cannot want fifty-five hundred talents.
But in the meantime he wants less, my lord.
If his occasion were not virtuous,
Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?
Timon myself, these gentlemen can witness; but I
True, as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed,
And he that's once denied will hardly speed.
Why, this is the world's soul, and just of the same
Is every flatterer's sport. Who can call him his friend
That dips in the same dish? For, in my knowing,
Timon has been this lord's father
And kept his credit with his purse,
Supported his estate, nay, Timon's money
Has paid his men their wages. He ne'er drinks
But Timon's silver treads upon his lip.
And yet--O, see the monstrousness of man
When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!--
He does deny him, in respect of his,
What charitable men afford to beggars.
Religion groans at it.
Nor came any of his bounties over me
To mark me for his friend. Yet I protest,
For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue,
And honorable carriage,
Had his necessity made use of me,
And the best half should have returned to him,
So much I love his heart. But I perceive
Men must learn now with pity to dispense,
For policy sits above conscience.
Must he needs trouble me in 't? Hum! 'Bove all others?
He might have tried Lord Lucius or Lucullus;
And now Ventidius is wealthy too,
Whom he redeemed from prison. All these
Owes their estates unto him.
They have all been touched and found base metal,
For they have all denied him.
Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him,
And does he send to me? Three? Humh!
It shows but little love or judgment in him.
Must I be his last refuge? His friends, like physicians,
Thrive, give him over. Must I take th' cure upon me?
Has much disgraced me in 't. I'm angry at him
That might have known my place. I see no sense for 't
But his occasions might have wooed me first;
For, in my conscience, I was the first man
That e'er received gift from him.
And does he think so backwardly of me now
That I'll requite it last? No.
So it may prove an argument of laughter
To th' rest, and I 'mongst lords be thought a fool.
Had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake;
And with their faint reply this answer join:
Who bates mine honor shall not know my coin.
The devil knew not what he did when he made
Of such a nature is his politic love.
This was my lord's best hope. Now all are fled,
Save only the gods. Now his friends are dead,
Doors that were ne'er acquainted with their wards
Many a bounteous year must be employed
Now to guard sure their master.
And this is all a liberal course allows:
Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.
Well met. Good morrow, Titus and Hortensius.
The like to you, kind Varro.
What, do we meet together?
One business does command us all,
For mine is money.
And, sir, Philotus' too.
What do you think the hour?
So much?
Ay, but the days are waxed shorter with him.
You must consider that a prodigal course
Is like the sun's,
But not, like his, recoverable. I fear
That is, one may reach deep enough and yet
Find little.
Your lord sends now for money?
And he wears jewels now of Timon's gift,
For which I wait for money.
Timon in this should pay more than he owes,
And e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewels
And send for money for 'em.
And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.
Yes, mine's three thousand crowns. What's yours?
Your master's confidence was above mine,
Else surely his had equaled.
Ha! Is not that his steward muffled so?
He goes away in a cloud. Call him, call him.
We wait for certain money here, sir.
If money were as certain as your waiting,
Why then preferred you not your sums and bills
When your false masters eat of my lord's meat?
Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts
And take down th' int'rest into their glutt'nous maws.
You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up.
Let me pass quietly.
Believe 't, my lord and I have made an end.
If 'twill not serve, 'tis not so base as you,
For you serve knaves.	
Worship mutter?
His comfortable temper has forsook him.
He's much out of health and keeps his chamber.
Many do keep their chambers are not sick;
And if it be so far beyond his health,
Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts
And make a clear way to the gods.
What, are my doors opposed against my passage?
Have I been ever free, and must my house
Be my retentive enemy, my jail?
The place which I have feasted, does it now,
Like all mankind, show me an iron heart?
Knock me down with 'em! Cleave me to the girdle.
Five thousand drops pays that.--What yours?--And
Tear me, take me, and the gods fall upon you!
They have e'en put my breath from me, the slaves!
Creditors? Devils!
So fitly? Go, bid all my friends again,
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius, all.
You only speak from your distracted soul.
There's not so much left to furnish out
Of knaves once more. My cook and I'll provide.
My lord, you have my voice to 't. The fault's
Bloody. 'Tis necessary he should die.
Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.
Honor, health, and compassion to the Senate!
For pity is the virtue of the law,
And none but tyrants use it cruelly.
It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy
Upon a friend of mine, who in hot blood
Hath stepped into the law, which is past depth
To those that without heed do plunge into 't.
He is a man--setting his fate aside--
Of comely virtues.
Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice--
An honor in him which buys out his fault--
But with a noble fury and fair spirit,
Seeing his reputation touched to death,
He did oppose his foe;
And with such sober and unnoted passion
He did behave his anger, ere 'twas spent,
As if he had but proved an argument.
You undergo too strict a paradox,
Striving to make an ugly deed look fair.
Your words have took such pains as if they labored
To bring manslaughter into form and set quarreling
Upon the head of valor--which indeed
Is valor misbegot, and came into the world
When sects and factions were newly born.
He's truly valiant that can wisely suffer
The worst that man can breathe
And make his wrongs his outsides,
To wear them like his raiment, carelessly,
And ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart
To bring it into danger.
If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,
What folly 'tis to hazard life for ill!
My lord--
To revenge is no valor, but to bear.
My lords, then, under favor, pardon me
If I speak like a captain.
Why do fond men expose themselves to battle
And not endure all threats? Sleep upon 't,
And let the foes quietly cut their throats
Without repugnancy? If there be
Such valor in the bearing, what make we
Abroad? Why, then, women are more valiant
That stay at home, if bearing carry it,
And the ass more captain than the lion, the felon
Loaden with irons wiser than the judge,
If wisdom be in suffering. O my lords,
As you are great, be pitifully good.
Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
To kill, I grant, is sin's extremest gust,
But in defense, by mercy, 'tis most just.
To be in anger is impiety,
But who is man that is not angry?
Weigh but the crime with this.
At Lacedaemon and Byzantium
Were a sufficient briber for his life.
Why, I say, my lords, has done fair service
And slain in fight many of your enemies.
How full of valor did he bear himself
In the last conflict, and made plenteous wounds!
He has made too much plenty with 'em.
He's a sworn rioter. He has a sin
That often drowns him and takes his valor prisoner.
If there were no foes, that were enough
To overcome him. In that beastly fury,
He has been known to commit outrages
And cherish factions. 'Tis inferred to us
His days are foul and his drink dangerous.
He dies.
My lords, if not for any parts in him--
Though his right arm might purchase his own time
And be in debt to none--yet, more to move you,
Take my deserts to his and join 'em both.
And, for I know your reverend ages love
Security, I'll pawn my victories, all
My honor, to you, upon his good returns.
If by this crime he owes the law his life,
Why, let the war receive 't in valiant gore,
For law is strict, and war is nothing more.
We are for law. He dies. Urge it no more,
On height of our displeasure. Friend or brother,
He forfeits his own blood that spills another.
My lords, I do beseech you, know me.
It could not else be I should prove so base
To sue and be denied such common grace.
My wounds ache at you.
We banish thee forever.
Banish your dotage, banish usury,
That makes the Senate ugly!
If after two days' shine Athens contain thee,
Attend our weightier judgment.
And, not to swell our spirit,
He shall be executed presently.	
Now the gods keep you old enough that you may live
Only in bone, that none may look on you!--
While they have told their money and let out
Their coin upon large interest, I myself
Rich only in large hurts. All those for this?
Is this the balsam that the usuring Senate
Pours into captains' wounds? Banishment.
It comes not ill. I hate not to be banished.
It is a cause worthy my spleen and fury,
That I may strike at Athens. I'll cheer up
My discontented troops and lay for hearts.
Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.
Here he comes.
Lordship.
Lordship that I returned you an empty messenger.
Come, bring in all together.
Sit, sit.  The gods require our thanks:
You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with
Uncover, dogs, and lap.
May you a better feast never behold,
You knot of mouth-friends! Smoke and lukewarm
Is your perfection. This is Timon's last,
Who, stuck and spangled with your flatteries,
Washes it off and sprinkles in your faces
Your reeking villainy. 
Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,
Courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears,
You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, time's flies,
Cap-and-knee slaves, vapors, and minute-jacks.
Of man and beast the infinite malady
Crust you quite o'er!  What, dost thou
Soft! Take thy physic first--thou too--and thou.--
Stay. I will lend thee money, borrow none.
What? All in motion? Henceforth be no feast
Whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.
Burn, house! Sink, Athens! Henceforth hated be
Of Timon man and all humanity!	
Lord Timon's mad.
One day he gives us diamonds, next day stones.
Let me look back upon thee. O thou wall
That girdles in those wolves, dive in the earth
And fence not Athens! Matrons, turn incontinent!
Obedience fail in children! Slaves and fools,
Pluck the grave wrinkled Senate from the bench
And minister in their steads! To general filths
Convert o' th' instant, green virginity!
Do 't in your parents' eyes! Bankrupts, hold fast!
Rather than render back, out with your knives
And cut your trusters' throats! Bound servants, steal!
Large-handed robbers your grave masters are,
And pill by law. Maid, to thy master's bed!
Thy mistress is o' th' brothel. Son of sixteen,
Pluck the lined crutch from thy old limping sire;
With it beat out his brains! Piety and fear,
Religion to the gods, peace, justice, truth,
Domestic awe, night rest, and neighborhood,
Instruction, manners, mysteries, and trades,
Degrees, observances, customs, and laws,
Decline to your confounding contraries,
And yet confusion live! Plagues incident to men,
Your potent and infectious fevers heap
On Athens, ripe for stroke! Thou cold sciatica,
Cripple our senators, that their limbs may halt
As lamely as their manners! Lust and liberty,
Creep in the minds and marrows of our youth,
That 'gainst the stream of virtue they may strive
And drown themselves in riot! Itches, blains,
Sow all th' Athenian bosoms, and their crop
Be general leprosy! Breath infect breath,
That their society, as their friendship, may
Be merely poison! Nothing I'll bear from thee
But nakedness, thou detestable town!
Take thou that too, with multiplying bans!
Timon will to the woods, where he shall find
Th' unkindest beast more kinder than mankind.
The gods confound--hear me, you good gods all!--
Th' Athenians both within and out that wall,
And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow
To the whole race of mankind, high and low!
Amen.
Hear you, Master Steward, where's our master?
Are we undone, cast off, nothing remaining?
Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?
Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,
So noble a master fall'n, all gone, and not
One friend to take his fortune by the arm
And go along with him?
From our companion thrown into his grave,
So his familiars to his buried fortunes
Slink all away, leave their false vows with him,
Like empty purses picked; and his poor self,
With his disease of all-shunned poverty,
Walks, like contempt, alone.
More of our fellows.
All broken implements of a ruined house.
Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery.
That see I by our faces. We are fellows still,
Serving alike in sorrow. Leaked is our bark,
And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck,
Hearing the surges threat. We must all part
Into this sea of air.
The latest of my wealth I'll share amongst you.
Wherever we shall meet, for Timon's sake
Let's yet be fellows. Let's shake our heads and say,
As 'twere a knell unto our master's fortunes,
Nay, put out all your hands. Not one word more.
Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,
Since riches point to misery and contempt?
Who would be so mocked with glory, or to live
But in a dream of friendship,
To have his pomp and all what state compounds
But only painted, like his varnished friends?
Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,
Undone by goodness! Strange unusual blood
When man's worst sin is he does too much good!
Who then dares to be half so kind again?
For bounty, that makes gods, do still mar men.
My dearest lord, blest to be most accursed,
Rich only to be wretched, thy great fortunes
Are made thy chief afflictions. Alas, kind lord!
He's flung in rage from this ingrateful seat
Of monstrous friends,
Nor has he with him to supply his life,
Or that which can command it.
Whilst I have gold, I'll be his steward still.
Rotten humidity! Below thy sister's orb
Infect the air! Twinned brothers of one womb,
Whose procreation, residence, and birth
Scarce is dividant, touch them with several fortunes,
The greater scorns the lesser. Not nature,
To whom all sores lay siege, can bear great fortune
But by contempt of nature.
Raise me this beggar, and deny 't that lord;
The Senators shall bear contempt hereditary,
The beggar native honor.
It is the pasture lards the brother's sides,
The want that makes him lean. Who dares, who
In purity of manhood stand upright
And say "This man's a flatterer"? If one be,
So are they all, for every grise of fortune
Is smoothed by that below. The learned pate
Ducks to the golden fool. All's obliquy.
There's nothing level in our cursed natures
But direct villainy. Therefore be abhorred
All feasts, societies, and throngs of men.
His semblable, yea, himself, Timon disdains.
Destruction fang mankind! Earth, yield me roots!
Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate
With thy most operant poison! 
Gold? Yellow, glittering, precious gold?
No, gods, I am no idle votarist.
Roots, you clear heavens! Thus much of this will
Black white, foul fair, wrong right,
Base noble, old young, coward valiant.
Ha, you gods! Why this? What this, you gods? Why,
Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,
Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads.
This yellow slave
Will knit and break religions, bless th' accursed,
Make the hoar leprosy adored, place thieves
And give them title, knee, and approbation
With senators on the bench. This is it
That makes the wappened widow wed again;
She whom the spital house and ulcerous sores
Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices
To th' April day again. Come, damned earth,
Thou common whore of mankind, that puts odds
Among the rout of nations, I will make thee
Do thy right nature.  Ha? A drum?
Thou 'rt quick,
But yet I'll bury thee. Thou 'lt go, strong thief,
When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.
Nay, stay thou out for earnest.
For showing me again the eyes of man!
What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee
That art thyself a man?
For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog,
That I might love thee something.
But in thy fortunes am unlearned and strange.
With man's blood paint the ground gules, gules!
Religious canons, civil laws are cruel.
Then what should war be? This fell whore of thine
Hath in her more destruction than thy sword,
For all her cherubin look.
To thine own lips again.
How came the noble Timon to this change?
As the moon does, by wanting light to give.
But then renew I could not, like the moon;
There were no suns to borrow of.
Noble Timon, what friendship may I do thee?
None, but to maintain my opinion.
Thou saw'st them when I had prosperity.
As thine is now, held with a brace of harlots.
Is this th' Athenian minion whom the world
Voiced so regardfully?
Be a whore still. They love thee not that use thee.
Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.
Make use of thy salt hours. Season the slaves
For tubs and baths. Bring down rose-cheeked youth
To the tub-fast and the diet.
Pardon him, sweet Timandra, for his wits
Are drowned and lost in his calamities.--
The want whereof doth daily make revolt
In my penurious band. I have heard and grieved
How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth,
Forgetting thy great deeds when neighbor states,
But for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them--
How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble?
Why, fare thee well. Here is some gold for thee.
When I have laid proud Athens on a heap--
Warr'st thou 'gainst Athens?
The gods confound them all in thy conquest,
And thee after, when thou hast conquered!
Why me, Timon?
Thou wast born to conquer my country.
Put up thy gold. Go on. Here's gold. Go on.
Be as a planetary plague when Jove
Will o'er some high-viced city hang his poison
In the sick air. Let not thy sword skip one.
Pity not honored age for his white beard;
He is an usurer. Strike me the counterfeit matron;
It is her habit only that is honest,
Herself's a bawd. Let not the virgin's cheek
Make soft thy trenchant sword, for those milk paps,
That through the window-bars bore at men's eyes,
Are not within the leaf of pity writ,
But set them down horrible traitors. Spare not the
Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their
Think it a bastard whom the oracle
Hath doubtfully pronounced the throat shall cut,
And mince it sans remorse. Swear against objects;
Put armor on thine ears and on thine eyes,
Whose proof nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,
Nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding,
Shall pierce a jot.  There's gold to
Make large confusion and, thy fury spent,
Confounded be thyself! Speak not. Begone.
Hast thou gold yet? I'll take the gold thou givest me,
Not all thy counsel.
Dost thou or dost thou not, heaven's curse upon thee!
Give us some gold, good Timon. Hast thou more?
Enough to make a whore forswear her trade,
And to make whores a bawd. Hold up, you sluts,
Your aprons mountant. 
Although I know you'll swear--terribly swear
Into strong shudders and to heavenly agues
Th' immortal gods that hear you. Spare your oaths.
And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,
Be strong in whore, allure him, burn him up.
Let your close fire predominate his smoke,
And be no turncoats. Yet may your pains six months
Be quite contrary. And thatch your poor thin roofs
With burdens of the dead--some that were hanged,
No matter; wear them, betray with them. Whore
Paint till a horse may mire upon your face.
Believe 't that we'll do anything for gold.
In hollow bones of man; strike their sharp shins,
And mar men's spurring. Crack the lawyer's voice,
That he may never more false title plead
Nor sound his quillets shrilly. Hoar the flamen,
That scolds against the quality of flesh
And not believes himself. Down with the nose--
Down with it flat, take the bridge quite away--
Of him that, his particular to foresee,
Smells from the general weal. Make curled-pate
And let the unscarred braggarts of the war
Derive some pain from you. Plague all,
That your activity may defeat and quell
The source of all erection. There's more gold.
Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
And ditches grave you all!
More counsel with more money, bounteous Timon.
More whore, more mischief first! I have given you
Strike up the drum towards Athens.--Farewell,
Timon.
If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again.
If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.
Yes, thou spok'st well of me.
Men daily find it. Get thee away, and take
Thy beagles with thee.
Strike.	
That nature, being sick of man's unkindness,
Should yet be hungry!  Common mother,
Whose womb unmeasurable and infinite breast
Teems and feeds all; whose selfsame mettle--
Whereof thy proud child, arrogant man, is puffed--
Engenders the black toad and adder blue,
The gilded newt and eyeless venomed worm,
With all th' abhorred births below crisp heaven
Whereon Hyperion's quick'ning fire doth shine:
Yield him who all thy human sons do hate,
From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root!
Ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb;
Let it no more bring out ingrateful man.
Go great with tigers, dragons, wolves, and bears;
Teem with new monsters, whom thy upward face
Hath to the marbled mansion all above
Never presented. O, a root! Dear thanks!
Dry up thy marrows, vines, and plow-torn leas,
Whereof ingrateful man with liquorish drafts
And morsels unctuous greases his pure mind,
That from it all consideration slips--
More man? Plague, plague!
Thou dost affect my manners and dost use them.
Whom I would imitate. Consumption catch thee!
This is in thee a nature but infected,
From change of future. Why this spade? This place?
This slavelike habit and these looks of care?
Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft,
Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgot
That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods
By putting on the cunning of a carper.
Be thou a flatterer now, and seek to thrive
By that which has undone thee. Hinge thy knee,
And let his very breath whom thou 'lt observe
Blow off thy cap; praise his most vicious strain,
And call it excellent. Thou wast told thus.
Thou gav'st thine ears, like tapsters that bade
To knaves and all approachers. 'Tis most just
That thou turn rascal. Had'st thou wealth again,
Rascals should have 't. Do not assume my likeness.
Were I like thee, I'd throw away myself.
Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself--
That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,
Will put thy shirt on warm? Will these moist trees,
That have outlived the eagle, page thy heels
And skip when thou point'st out? Will the cold brook,
Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste
To cure thy o'ernight's surfeit? Call the creatures
Whose naked natures live in all the spite
Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,
To the conflicting elements exposed,
Answer mere nature. Bid them flatter thee.
Always a villain's office or a fool's.
Dost please thyself in 't?
If thou didst put this sour cold habit on
To castigate thy pride, 'twere well, but thou
Dost it enforcedly. Thou 'dst courtier be again
Wert thou not beggar. Willing misery
Outlives incertain pomp, is crowned before;
The one is filling still, never complete,
The other at high wish. Best state, contentless,
Hath a distracted and most wretched being,
Worse than the worst, content.
Thou shouldst desire to die, being miserable.
Not by his breath that is more miserable.
Thou art a slave whom Fortune's tender arm
With favor never clasped but bred a dog.
Hadst thou, like us from our first swathe, proceeded
The sweet degrees that this brief world affords
To such as may the passive drugs of it
Freely command, thou wouldst have plunged
In general riot, melted down thy youth
In different beds of lust, and never learned
The icy precepts of respect, but followed
The sugared game before thee. But myself--
Who had the world as my confectionary,
The mouths, the tongues, the eyes and hearts of
At duty, more than I could frame employment,
That numberless upon me stuck as leaves
Do on the oak, have with one winter's brush
Fell from their boughs and left me open, bare,
For every storm that blows--I to bear this,
That never knew but better, is some burden.
Thy nature did commence in sufferance. Time
Hath made thee hard in 't. Why shouldst thou hate
They never flattered thee. What hast thou given?
If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,
Must be thy subject, who in spite put stuff
To some she-beggar and compounded thee
Poor rogue hereditary. Hence, begone.
If thou hadst not been born the worst of men,
Thou hadst been a knave and flatterer.
Art thou proud yet?
Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
That the whole life of Athens were in this!
Thus would I eat it.	
First mend my company. Take away thyself.
So I shall mend mine own by th' lack of thine.
If not, I would it were.
Thee thither in a whirlwind. If thou wilt,
Tell them there I have gold. Look, so I have.
Here is no use for gold.
For here it sleeps and does no hired harm.
There's a medlar for thee. Eat it.
Apemantus, if it lay in thy power?
Wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seized by the
Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.
Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon!
All villains that do stand by thee are pure.
There is no leprosy but what thou speak'st.
Away, thou issue of a mangy dog!
Choler does kill me that thou art alive.
Would thou wouldst burst!
But even the mere necessities upon 't.
Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave.
Lie where the light foam of the sea may beat
Thy gravestone daily. Make thine epitaph,
That death in me at others' lives may laugh.
Of Hymen's purest bed, thou valiant Mars,
Thou ever young, fresh, loved, and delicate wooer,
Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow
That lies on Dian's lap; thou visible god,
That sold'rest close impossibilities
And mak'st them kiss, that speak'st with every
To every purpose! O thou touch of hearts,
Think thy slave, man, rebels, and by thy virtue
Set them into confounding odds, that beasts
May have the world in empire!
But not till I am dead. I'll say thou 'st gold;
Thou wilt be thronged to shortly.
Thy back, I prithee.
More things like men.--Eat, Timon, and abhor
Soldiers, not thieves.
We are not thieves, but men that much do want.
Your greatest want is, you want much of meat.
Why should you want? Behold, the earth hath roots.
Within this mile break forth a hundred springs.
The oaks bear mast, the briars scarlet hips.
The bounteous huswife Nature on each bush
Lays her full mess before you. Want? Why want?
We cannot live on grass, on berries, water,
As beasts and birds and fishes.
Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds and fishes;
You must eat men. Yet thanks I must you con
That you are thieves professed, that you work not
In holier shapes, for there is boundless theft
In limited professions. Rascal thieves,
Here's gold.  Go, suck the
Till the high fever seethe your blood to froth,
And so 'scape hanging. Trust not the physician;
His antidotes are poison, and he slays
More than you rob. Take wealth and lives together.
Do, villainy, do, since you protest to do 't,
Like workmen. I'll example you with thievery.
The sun's a thief and with his great attraction
Robs the vast sea. The moon's an arrant thief,
And her pale fire she snatches from the sun.
The sea's a thief, whose liquid surge resolves
The moon into salt tears. The earth's a thief,
That feeds and breeds by a composture stol'n
From gen'ral excrement. Each thing's a thief.
The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
Has unchecked theft. Love not yourselves. Away!
Rob one another. There's more gold. 
All that you meet are thieves. To Athens go.
Break open shops. Nothing can you steal
But thieves do lose it. Steal less for this I give you,
And gold confound you howsoe'er! Amen.
Is yond despised and ruinous man my lord?
Full of decay and flailing? O, monument
And wonder of good deeds evilly bestowed!
What an alteration of honor has desp'rate want
What viler thing upon the Earth than friends,
Who can bring noblest minds to basest ends!
How rarely does it meet with this time's guise,
When man was wished to love his enemies!
Grant I may ever love, and rather woo
Those that would mischief me than those that do!
Has caught me in his eye. I will present
My honest grief unto him and as my lord
Still serve him with my life.--My dearest master.
Away! What art thou?
Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men.
Then, if thou grant'st thou 'rt a man, I have forgot
Ne'er did poor steward wear a truer grief
For his undone lord than mine eyes for you.
What, dost thou weep? Come nearer, then. I love
Because thou art a woman and disclaim'st
Flinty mankind, whose eyes do never give
But thorough lust and laughter. Pity's sleeping.
Strange times that weep with laughing, not with
To entertain me as your steward still.
So true, so just, and now so comfortable?
It almost turns my dangerous nature mild.
Let me behold thy face. Surely this man
Was born of woman.
Forgive my general and exceptless rashness,
You perpetual-sober gods. I do proclaim
One honest man--mistake me not, but one;
No more, I pray!--and he's a steward.
How fain would I have hated all mankind,
And thou redeem'st thyself. But all, save thee,
Methinks thou art more honest now than wise,
For by oppressing and betraying me
Thou mightst have sooner got another service;
For many so arrive at second masters
Upon their first lord's neck. But tell me true--
For I must ever doubt, though ne'er so sure--
Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,
Expecting in return twenty for one?
No, my most worthy master, in whose breast
Doubt and suspect, alas, are placed too late.
You should have feared false times when you did
Suspect still comes where an estate is least.
That which I show, heaven knows, is merely love,
Duty, and zeal to your unmatched mind,
Care of your food and living. And believe it,
My most honored lord,
For any benefit that points to me,
Either in hope or present, I'd exchange
For this one wish, that you had power and wealth
To requite me by making rich yourself.
Look thee, 'tis so. Thou singly honest man,
Here, take.  The gods out of my
Has sent thee treasure. Go, live rich and happy,
But thus conditioned: thou shalt build from men;
Hate all, curse all, show charity to none,
But let the famished flesh slide from the bone
Ere thou relieve the beggar; give to dogs
What thou deniest to men; let prisons swallow 'em,
Debts wither 'em to nothing; be men like blasted
And may diseases lick up their false bloods!
And so farewell and thrive.
And comfort you, my master.
Stay not. Fly whilst thou art blest and free.
Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.
Timandra had gold of him. He likewise enriched
Athens again, and flourish with the highest. Therefore
Then do we sin against our own estate
When we may profit meet and come too late.
When the day serves, before black-cornered night,
Find what thou want'st by free and offered light.
Come.
That he is worshiped in a baser temple
Than where swine feed!
Settlest admired reverence in a slave.
To thee be worship, and thy saints for aye
Be crowned with plagues, that thee alone obey!
Fit I meet them.	
Hail, worthy Timon.
Have I once lived to see two honest men?
Having often of your open bounty tasted,
Hearing you were retired, your friends fall'n off,
Whose thankless natures--O, abhorred spirits!
Not all the whips of heaven are large enough--
What, to you,
Whose starlike nobleness gave life and influence
To their whole being? I am rapt and cannot cover
The monstrous bulk of this ingratitude
With any size of words.
Let it go naked. Men may see 't the better.
You that are honest, by being what you are
Make them best seen and known.
Have travailed in the great shower of your gifts
And sweetly felt it.
We are hither come to offer you our service.
Most honest men! Why, how shall I requite you?
Can you eat roots and drink cold water? No?
What we can do we'll do to do you service.
You're honest men. You've heard that I have gold.
So it is said, my noble lord, but therefor
Came not my friend nor I.
Good honest men.  Thou draw'st a
Best in all Athens. Thou 'rt indeed the best.
Thou counterfeit'st most lively.
Why, thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth
That thou art even natural in thine art.
But for all this, my honest-natured friends,
Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you, neither wish I
You take much pains to mend.
To make it known to us.
There's never a one of you but trusts a knave
That mightily deceives you.
Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,
Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,
Keep in your bosom. Yet remain assured
That he's a made-up villain.
Look you, I love you well. I'll give you gold.
Rid me these villains from your companies,
Hang them or stab them, drown them in a draft,
Confound them by some course, and come to me,
You that way and you this, but two in company.
Each man apart, all single and alone,
Yet an archvillain keeps him company.
Come not near him.  If thou wouldst
But where one villain is, then him abandon.--
Hence, pack. There's gold. You came for gold, you
Hence.
Out, rascal dogs!
It is vain that you would speak with Timon,
For he is set so only to himself
That nothing but himself which looks like man
Is friendly with him.
It is our part and promise to th' Athenians
To speak with Timon.
Men are not still the same. 'Twas time and griefs
That framed him thus. Time, with his fairer hand
Offering the fortunes of his former days,
The former man may make him. Bring us to him,
And chance it as it may.
Peace and content be here! Lord Timon! Timon!
Look out, and speak to friends. Th' Athenians
By two of their most reverend Senate greet thee.
Speak to them, noble Timon.
Thou sun that comforts, burn!--Speak and be
For each true word a blister, and each false
Be as a cauterizing to the root o' th' tongue,
Consuming it with speaking.
Of none but such as you, and you of Timon.
The Senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.
Could I but catch it for them.
What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.
The Senators with one consent of love
Entreat thee back to Athens, who have thought
On special dignities which vacant lie
For thy best use and wearing.
Toward thee forgetfulness too general gross;
Which now the public body, which doth seldom
Play the recanter, feeling in itself
Of it own fall, restraining aid to Timon,
And send forth us to make their sorrowed render,
Together with a recompense more fruitful
Than their offense can weigh down by the dram--
Ay, even such heaps and sums of love and wealth
As shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs
And write in thee the figures of their love,
Ever to read them thine.
Surprise me to the very brink of tears.
Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes,
And I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.
Therefore, so please thee to return with us
And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take
The captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks;
Allowed with absolute power, and thy good name
Live with authority. So soon we shall drive back
Of Alcibiades th' approaches wild,
Who like a boar too savage doth root up
His country's peace.
Against the walls of Athens.
Well sir, I will. Therefore I will, sir, thus:
If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,
Let Alcibiades know this of Timon--
That Timon cares not. But if he sack fair Athens
And take our goodly aged men by th' beards,
Giving our holy virgins to the stain
Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brained war,
Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it
In pity of our aged and our youth,
And let him take 't at worst--for their knives care not,
While you have throats to answer. For myself,
There's not a whittle in th' unruly camp
But I do prize it at my love before
The reverend'st throat in Athens. So I leave you
To the protection of the prosperous gods
As thieves to keepers.
Why, I was writing of my epitaph.
It will be seen tomorrow. My long sickness
Of health and living now begins to mend,
And nothing brings me all things. Go, live still.
Be Alcibiades your plague, you his,
And last so long enough!
But yet I love my country and am not
One that rejoices in the common wrack,
As common bruit doth put it.
Commend me to my loving countrymen.
These words become your lips as they pass through
And enter in our ears like great triumphers
In their applauding gates.
And tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,
Their fears of hostile strokes, their aches, losses,
Their pangs of love, with other incident throes
That nature's fragile vessel doth sustain
In life's uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do
That mine own use invites me to cut down,
And shortly must I fell it. Tell my friends,
Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree
From high to low throughout, that whoso please
To stop affliction, let him take his haste,
Come hither ere my tree hath felt the ax,
And hang himself. I pray you, do my greeting.
Trouble him no further. Thus you still shall find him.
Come not to me again, but say to Athens,
Timon hath made his everlasting mansion
Upon the beached verge of the salt flood,
Who once a day with his embossed froth
The turbulent surge shall cover. Thither come
And let my gravestone be your oracle.
Lips, let four words go by and language end.
What is amiss, plague and infection mend.
Graves only be men's works, and death their gain.
Sun, hide thy beams. Timon hath done his reign.
His discontents are unremovably
Coupled to nature.
Our hope in him is dead. Let us return
And strain what other means is left unto us
In our dear peril.
Thou hast painfully discovered. Are his files
As full as thy report?
Besides, his expedition promises
Present approach.
We stand much hazard if they bring not Timon.
Whom, though in general part we were opposed,
Yet our old love made a particular force
And made us speak like friends. This man was riding
From Alcibiades to Timon's cave
With letters of entreaty which imported
His fellowship i' th' cause against your city,
In part for his sake moved.
No talk of Timon; nothing of him expect.
The enemy's drum is heard, and fearful scouring
Doth choke the air with dust. In, and prepare.
Ours is the fall, I fear, our foe's the snare.
By all description this should be the place.
Who's here? Speak, ho! No answer? What is this?
Timon is dead, who hath out-stretched his span.
Some beast read this; there does not live a man.
Dead, sure, and this his grave. What's on this tomb
Our captain hath in every figure skill,
An aged interpreter, though young in days.
Before proud Athens he's set down by this,
Whose fall the mark of his ambition is.
Sound to this coward and lascivious town
Our terrible approach.	
Till now you have gone on and filled the time
With all licentious measure, making your wills
The scope of justice. Till now myself and such
As slept within the shadow of your power
Have wandered with our traversed arms and breathed
Our sufferance vainly. Now the time is flush,
When crouching marrow in the bearer strong
Cries of itself "No more!" Now breathless wrong
Shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease,
And pursy insolence shall break his wind
With fear and horrid flight.
When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,
We sent to thee to give thy rages balm,
To wipe out our ingratitude with loves
Above their quantity.
Transformed Timon to our city's love
By humble message and by promised means.
We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
The common stroke of war.
Were not erected by their hands from whom
You have received your grief, nor are they such
That these great towers, trophies, and schools
For private faults in them.
Who were the motives that you first went out.
Shame, that they wanted cunning, in excess
Hath broke their hearts. March, noble lord,
Into our city with thy banners spread.
By decimation and a tithed death,
If thy revenges hunger for that food
Which nature loathes, take thou the destined tenth
And, by the hazard of the spotted die,
Let die the spotted.
For those that were, it is not square to take,
On those that are, revenge. Crimes, like lands,
Are not inherited. Then, dear countryman,
Bring in thy ranks but leave without thy rage.
Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin
Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall
With those that have offended. Like a shepherd
Approach the fold and cull th' infected forth,
But kill not all together.
Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile
Than hew to 't with thy sword.
Against our rampired gates and they shall ope,
So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before
To say thou 'lt enter friendly.
Or any token of thine honor else,
That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress
And not as our confusion, all thy powers
Shall make their harbor in our town till we
Have sealed thy full desire.
Descend and open your uncharged ports.
Those enemies of Timon's and mine own
Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof
Fall, and no more. And to atone your fears
With my more noble meaning, not a man
Shall pass his quarter or offend the stream
Of regular justice in your city's bounds
But shall be remedied to your public laws
At heaviest answer.
My noble general, Timon is dead,
Entombed upon the very hem o' th' sea,
And on his gravestone this insculpture, which
With wax I brought away, whose soft impression
Interprets for my poor ignorance.
Here lies a wretched corse, of wretched soul bereft.
Seek not my name. A plague consume you, wicked
Here lie I, Timon, who, alive, all living men did hate.
Pass by and curse thy fill, but pass and stay not here
These well express in thee thy latter spirits.
Though thou abhorred'st in us our human griefs,
Scorned'st our brains' flow and those our droplets
From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit
Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
On thy low grave, on faults forgiven. Dead
Is noble Timon, of whose memory
Hereafter more. Bring me into your city,
And I will use the olive with my sword,
Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make
Prescribe to other as each other's leech.
Let our drums strike.
Cease to persuade, my loving Proteus.
Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits.
Were 't not affection chains thy tender days
To the sweet glances of thy honored love,
To see the wonders of the world abroad
Than, living dully sluggardized at home,
Wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness.
But since thou lov'st, love still and thrive therein,
Even as I would when I to love begin.
Wilt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine, adieu.
Think on thy Proteus when thou haply seest
Some rare noteworthy object in thy travel.
Wish me partaker in thy happiness
When thou dost meet good hap; and in thy danger,
If ever danger do environ thee,
Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers,
For I will be thy beadsman, Valentine.
And on a love-book pray for my success?
Upon some book I love I'll pray for thee.
That's on some shallow story of deep love,
How young Leander crossed the Hellespont.
That's a deep story of a deeper love,
For he was more than over shoes in love.
And yet you never swam the Hellespont.
Over the boots? Nay, give me not the boots.
No, I will not, for it boots thee not.
To be in love, where scorn is bought with groans,
Coy looks with heart-sore sighs, one fading
With twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights;
If haply won, perhaps a hapless gain;
If lost, why then a grievous labor won;
How ever, but a folly bought with wit,
Or else a wit by folly vanquished.
So, by your circumstance, you call me fool.
So, by your circumstance, I fear you'll prove.
Love is your master, for he masters you;
And he that is so yoked by a fool
Methinks should not be chronicled for wise.
Yet writers say: as in the sweetest bud
The eating canker dwells, so eating love
Inhabits in the finest wits of all.
And writers say: as the most forward bud
Is eaten by the canker ere it blow,
Even so by love the young and tender wit
Is turned to folly, blasting in the bud,
Losing his verdure, even in the prime,
And all the fair effects of future hopes.
But wherefore waste I time to counsel thee
That art a votary to fond desire?
Once more adieu. My father at the road
Expects my coming, there to see me shipped.
And thither will I bring thee, Valentine.
Sweet Proteus, no. Now let us take our leave.
To Milan let me hear from thee by letters
Of thy success in love, and what news else
Betideth here in absence of thy friend.
And I likewise will visit thee with mine.
All happiness bechance to thee in Milan.
As much to you at home. And so farewell.	
He after honor hunts, I after love.
He leaves his friends, to dignify them more;
Thou, Julia, thou hast metamorphosed me,
Made me neglect my studies, lose my time,
War with good counsel, set the world at nought;
Made wit with musing weak, heart sick with thought.
Sir Proteus, 'save you. Saw you my master?
But now he parted hence to embark for Milan.
Twenty to one, then, he is shipped already,
And I have played the sheep in losing him.
Indeed a sheep doth very often stray,
An if the shepherd be awhile away.
Julia?
From a pound to a pin? Fold it over and over,
And being so hard to me that brought your mind, I
Give her no token but stones, for she's as hard as
To testify your bounty, I thank you, you have
Go, go, begone, to save your ship from wrack,
Which cannot perish having thee aboard,
Being destined to a drier death on shore.
Receiving them from such a worthless post.
But say, Lucetta, now we are alone,
Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?
Ay, madam, so you stumble not unheedfully.
Of all the fair resort of gentlemen
That every day with parle encounter me,
In thy opinion which is worthiest love?
Please you repeat their names, I'll show my mind
According to my shallow simple skill.
What think'st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?
As of a knight well-spoken, neat, and fine;
But, were I you, he never should be mine.
What think'st thou of the rich Mercatio?
Well of his wealth, but of himself so-so.
What think'st thou of the gentle Proteus?
Lord, Lord, to see what folly reigns in us!
How now? What means this passion at his name?
Pardon, dear madam, 'tis a passing shame
That I, unworthy body as I am,
Should censure thus on lovely gentlemen.
Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest?
Then thus: of many good, I think him best.
And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him?
Ay, if you thought your love not cast away.
Why, he of all the rest hath never moved me.
Yet he of all the rest I think best loves you.
His little speaking shows his love but small.
Fire that's closest kept burns most of all.
They do not love that do not show their love.
Sir Valentine's page; and sent, I think, from
Proteus.
He would have given it you, but I, being in the way,
Did in your name receive it. Pardon the fault, I pray.
Now, by my modesty, a goodly broker!
Dare you presume to harbor wanton lines?
To whisper and conspire against my youth?
Now trust me, 'tis an office of great worth,
And you an officer fit for the place.
There, take the paper; see it be returned,
Or else return no more into my sight.
To plead for love deserves more fee than hate.
Will you be gone?
And yet I would I had o'erlooked the letter.
It were a shame to call her back again
And pray her to a fault for which I chid her.
What fool is she that knows I am a maid
And would not force the letter to my view,
Since maids in modesty say "no" to that
Which they would have the profferer construe "ay"!
Fie, fie, how wayward is this foolish love
That like a testy babe will scratch the nurse
And presently, all humbled, kiss the rod!
How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence,
When willingly I would have had her here!
How angerly I taught my brow to frown,
When inward joy enforced my heart to smile!
My penance is to call Lucetta back
And ask remission for my folly past.--
What ho, Lucetta!
Is 't near dinner time?
That you might kill your stomach on your meat
And not upon your maid.
What is 't that you took up so gingerly?
To take a paper up that I let fall.
Then let it lie for those that it concerns.
Madam, it will not lie where it concerns
Unless it have a false interpreter.
Some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme.
That I might sing it, madam, to a tune,
Give me a note. Your Ladyship can set--
As little by such toys as may be possible.
Best sing it to the tune of "Light o' Love."
It is too heavy for so light a tune.
Heavy? Belike it hath some burden then?
Ay, and melodious were it, would you sing it.
And why not you?
Let's see your song. How now, minion!
Keep tune there still, so you will sing it out.
And yet methinks I do not like this tune.
And mar the concord with too harsh a descant.
There wanteth but a mean to fill your song.
The mean is drowned with your unruly bass.
Indeed, I bid the base for Proteus.
This babble shall not henceforth trouble me.
Here is a coil with protestation.
Go, get you gone, and let the papers lie.
You would be fing'ring them to anger me.
She makes it strange, but she would be best pleased
To be so angered with another letter.	
Nay, would I were so angered with the same!
Injurious wasps, to feed on such sweet honey
And kill the bees that yield it with your stings!
Look, here is writ "kind Julia." Unkind Julia,
As in revenge of thy ingratitude,
Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.
And here is writ "love-wounded Proteus."
Poor wounded name, my bosom as a bed
Shall lodge thee till thy wound be throughly healed,
And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss.
But twice or thrice was "Proteus" written down.
Be calm, good wind. Blow not a word away
Till I have found each letter in the letter
Except mine own name. That some whirlwind bear
Unto a ragged, fearful, hanging rock
And throw it thence into the raging sea.
Lo, here in one line is his name twice writ:
To the sweet Julia." That I'll tear away--
And yet I will not, sith so prettily
He couples it to his complaining names.
Thus will I fold them one upon another.
Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.
Madam, dinner is ready, and your father stays.
What, shall these papers lie like telltales here?
If you respect them, best to take them up.
Nay, I was taken up for laying them down.
Yet here they shall not lie, for catching cold.
Ay, madam, you may say what sights you see;
Tell me, Pantino, what sad talk was that
Wherewith my brother held you in the cloister?
Why, what of him?
Would suffer him to spend his youth at home
While other men, of slender reputation,
Put forth their sons to seek preferment out:
Some to the wars to try their fortune there,
Some to discover islands far away,
Some to the studious universities.
For any or for all these exercises
He said that Proteus your son was meet,
And did request me to importune you
To let him spend his time no more at home,
Which would be great impeachment to his age
In having known no travel in his youth.
Nor need'st thou much importune me to that
Whereon this month I have been hammering.
And how he cannot be a perfect man,
Not being tried and tutored in the world.
Experience is by industry achieved
And perfected by the swift course of time.
Then tell me whither were I best to send him.
How his companion, youthful Valentine,
Attends the Emperor in his royal court.
There shall he practice tilts and tournaments,
Hear sweet discourse, converse with noblemen,
And be in eye of every exercise
Worthy his youth and nobleness of birth.
And that thou mayst perceive how well I like it,
The execution of it shall make known.
Even with the speediest expedition
Tomorrow, may it please you, Don Alphonso,
With other gentlemen of good esteem,
Are journeying to salute the Emperor
And to commend their service to his will.
Good company. With them shall Proteus go.
And in good time! Now will we break with him.
Sweet love, sweet lines, sweet life!
Here is her hand, the agent of her heart;
Here is her oath for love, her honor's pawn.
To seal our happiness with their consents.
How now? What letter are you reading there?
May 't please your Lordship, 'tis a word or two
Of commendations sent from Valentine,
Delivered by a friend that came from him.
Lend me the letter. Let me see what news.
There is no news, my lord, but that he writes
How happily he lives, how well beloved
And daily graced by the Emperor,
Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune.
And how stand you affected to his wish?
As one relying on your Lordship's will,
And not depending on his friendly wish.
My will is something sorted with his wish.
Muse not that I thus suddenly proceed,
For what I will, I will, and there an end.
With Valentinus in the Emperor's court.
What maintenance he from his friends receives,
Like exhibition thou shalt have from me.
Tomorrow be in readiness to go.
Excuse it not, for I am peremptory.
My lord, I cannot be so soon provided.
Please you deliberate a day or two.
Look what thou want'st shall be sent after thee.
No more of stay. Tomorrow thou must go.--
Come on, Pantino; you shall be employed
To hasten on his expedition.
Thus have I shunned the fire for fear of burning
And drenched me in the sea, where I am drowned.
Lest he should take exceptions to my love,
And with the vantage of mine own excuse
Hath he excepted most against my love.
The uncertain glory of an April day,
Which now shows all the beauty of the sun,
And by and by a cloud takes all away.
Sir Proteus, your father calls for you.
He is in haste. Therefore, I pray you, go.
Why, this it is: my heart accords thereto.
Sir, your glove.
Why, then, this may be yours, for this is but one.
Ha? Let me see. Ay, give it me, it's mine.
Sweet ornament that decks a thing divine!
Ah, Sylvia, Sylvia!
Sylvia?
Sylvia?
Peace, here she comes.
Now will he interpret to her.
As you enjoined me, I have writ your letter
Unto the secret, nameless friend of yours,
Which I was much unwilling to proceed in
But for my duty to your Ladyship.
Now trust me, madam, it came hardly off,
For, being ignorant to whom it goes,
Perchance you think too much of so much pains?
No, madam. So it stead you, I will write,
Please you command, a thousand times as much,
And yet--
And yet I will not name it And yet I care not.
And yet take this again.	
And yet I thank you,
Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
And yet you will; and yet another "yet."
What means your Ladyship? Do you not like it?
Yes, yes, the lines are very quaintly writ,
But, since unwillingly, take them again.
Nay, take them.	
Ay, ay. You writ them, sir, at my request,
But I will none of them. They are for you.
Please you, I'll write your Ladyship another.
And when it's writ, for my sake read it over,
And if it please you, so; if not, why, so.
Why, if it please you, take it for your labor.
And so good-morrow, servant.	
As a nose on a man's face, or a weathercock on a
My master sues to her, and she hath taught her
He being her pupil, to become her tutor.
That my master, being scribe, to himself should
For often have you writ to her, and she, in modesty
Or else for want of idle time, could not again reply,
Or fearing else some messenger that might her
Herself hath taught her love himself to write unto
All this I speak in print, for in print I found it. Why
When possibly I can, I will return.
If you turn not, you will return the sooner.
Keep this remembrance for thy Julia's sake.
Why, then we'll make exchange. Here, take you this.
And seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
Here is my hand for my true constancy.
And when that hour o'erslips me in the day
Wherein I sigh not, Julia, for thy sake,
The next ensuing hour some foul mischance
Torment me for my love's forgetfulness.
My father stays my coming. Answer not.
The tide is now--nay, not thy tide of tears;
That tide will stay me longer than I should.
Julia, farewell.	
What, gone without a word?
Ay, so true love should do. It cannot speak,
For truth hath better deeds than words to grace it.
All the kind of the Lances have this very fault. I have
Nay, I'll show you the manner of it. 
You'll lose the tide if you tarry any longer.
Sir Thurio borrows his wit from your Ladyship's
No more, gentlemen, no more. Here comes my
Now, daughter Sylvia, you are hard beset.--
Sir Valentine, your father is in good health.
What say you to a letter from your friends
Of much good news?
To any happy messenger from thence.
Know you Don Antonio, your countryman?
Ay, my good lord, I know the gentleman
To be of worth and worthy estimation,
And not without desert so well reputed.
Ay, my good lord, a son that well deserves
The honor and regard of such a father.
We have conversed and spent our hours together,
And though myself have been an idle truant,
Omitting the sweet benefit of time
To clothe mine age with angel-like perfection,
Yet hath Sir Proteus--for that's his name--
Made use and fair advantage of his days:
His years but young, but his experience old;
His head unmellowed, but his judgment ripe;
And in a word--for far behind his worth
Comes all the praises that I now bestow--
He is complete in feature and in mind,
With all good grace to grace a gentleman.
Beshrew me, sir, but if he make this good,
He is as worthy for an empress' love,
As meet to be an emperor's counselor.
Well, sir, this gentleman is come to me
With commendation from great potentates,
And here he means to spend his time awhile.
Should I have wished a thing, it had been he.
Welcome him then according to his worth.
Sylvia, I speak to you--and you, Sir Thurio.
For Valentine, I need not cite him to it.
This is the gentleman I told your Ladyship
Had come along with me but that his mistress
Did hold his eyes locked in her crystal looks.
Belike that now she hath enfranchised them
Upon some other pawn for fealty.
Nay, sure, I think she holds them prisoners still.
Nay, then, he should be blind, and being blind
How could he see his way to seek out you?
Why, lady, love hath twenty pair of eyes.
They say that Love hath not an eye at all.
To see such lovers, Thurio, as yourself.
Upon a homely object, Love can wink.
Have done, have done. Here comes the gentleman.
Welcome, dear Proteus.--Mistress, I beseech you
Confirm his welcome with some special favor.
His worth is warrant for his welcome hither,
If this be he you oft have wished to hear from.
Mistress, it is. Sweet lady, entertain him
To be my fellow-servant to your Ladyship.
Too low a mistress for so high a servant.
Not so, sweet lady, but too mean a servant
To have a look of such a worthy mistress.
Leave off discourse of disability.
Sweet lady, entertain him for your servant.
My duty will I boast of, nothing else.
And duty never yet did want his meed.
Servant, you are welcome to a worthless mistress.
Madam, my lord your father would speak with you.
Thurio,
Go with me.--Once more, new servant, welcome.
When you have done, we look to hear from you.
We'll both attend upon your Ladyship.
Now tell me, how do all from whence you came?
Your friends are well and have them much
And how do yours?
How does your lady? And how thrives your love?
My tales of love were wont to weary you.
Ay, Proteus, but that life is altered now.
Whose high imperious thoughts have punished me
With bitter fasts, with penitential groans,
With nightly tears, and daily heartsore sighs,
For in revenge of my contempt of love,
Love hath chased sleep from my enthralled eyes
And made them watchers of mine own heart's
And hath so humbled me as I confess
There is no woe to his correction,
Nor, to his service, no such joy on Earth.
Now, no discourse except it be of love.
Now can I break my fast, dine, sup, and sleep
Upon the very naked name of Love.
Enough; I read your fortune in your eye.
Was this the idol that you worship so?
Even she. And is she not a heavenly saint?
No, but she is an earthly paragon.
Call her divine.
When I was sick, you gave me bitter pills,
And I must minister the like to you.
Then speak the truth by her; if not divine,
Yet let her be a principality,
Sovereign to all the creatures on the Earth.
Except my mistress.
Except thou wilt except against my love.
Have I not reason to prefer mine own?
And I will help thee to prefer her too:
She shall be dignified with this high honor--
To bear my lady's train, lest the base earth
Should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss
And, of so great a favor growing proud,
Disdain to root the summer-swelling flower
And make rough winter everlastingly.
Why, Valentine, what braggartism is this?
Pardon me, Proteus, all I can is nothing
To her whose worth makes other worthies
She is alone--
Not for the world! Why, man, she is mine own,
And I as rich in having such a jewel
As twenty seas if all their sand were pearl,
The water nectar, and the rocks pure gold.
Forgive me that I do not dream on thee,
Because thou seest me dote upon my love.
My foolish rival, that her father likes
Only for his possessions are so huge,
Is gone with her along, and I must after,
For love, thou know'st, is full of jealousy.
Ay, and we are betrothed; nay more, our marriage
With all the cunning manner of our flight
Determined of: how I must climb her window,
The ladder made of cords, and all the means
Plotted and 'greed on for my happiness.
Good Proteus, go with me to my chamber,
In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel.
Go on before. I shall inquire you forth.
Some necessaries that I needs must use,
And then I'll presently attend you.
Even as one heat another heat expels,
Or as one nail by strength drives out another,
So the remembrance of my former love
Is by a newer object quite forgotten.
Is it mine eye, or Valentine's praise,
Her true perfection, or my false transgression,
That makes me reasonless to reason thus?
She is fair, and so is Julia that I love--
That I did love, for now my love is thawed,
Which like a waxen image 'gainst a fire
Bears no impression of the thing it was.
Methinks my zeal to Valentine is cold,
And that I love him not as I was wont.
And that's the reason I love him so little.
How shall I dote on her with more advice
That thus without advice begin to love her?
And that hath dazzled my reason's light;
But when I look on her perfections,
There is no reason but I shall be blind.
If I can check my erring love, I will;
If not, to compass her I'll use my skill.
To leave my Julia, shall I be forsworn.
To love fair Sylvia, shall I be forsworn.
To wrong my friend, I shall be much forsworn.
And ev'n that power which gave me first my oath
Provokes me to this threefold perjury.
Love bade me swear, and love bids me forswear.
Teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it.
At first I did adore a twinkling star,
But now I worship a celestial sun;
Unheedful vows may heedfully be broken,
And he wants wit that wants resolved will
To learn his wit t' exchange the bad for better.
Fie, fie, unreverend tongue, to call her bad
Whose sovereignty so oft thou hast preferred
With twenty thousand soul-confirming oaths.
But there I leave to love where I should love.
Julia I lose, and Valentine I lose;
If I keep them, I needs must lose myself;
If I lose them, thus find I by their loss:
For Valentine, myself; for Julia, Sylvia.
For love is still most precious in itself,
And Sylvia--witness heaven that made her fair--
Shows Julia but a swarthy Ethiope.
Rememb'ring that my love to her is dead;
And Valentine I'll hold an enemy,
Aiming at Sylvia as a sweeter friend.
Without some treachery used to Valentine.
This night he meaneth with a corded ladder
To climb celestial Sylvia's chamber window,
Myself in counsel his competitor.
Now presently I'll give her father notice
Of their disguising and pretended flight,
Who, all enraged, will banish Valentine,
For Thurio he intends shall wed his daughter.
But Valentine being gone, I'll quickly cross
By some sly trick blunt Thurio's dull proceeding.
Love, lend me wings to make my purpose swift,
As thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift.
Counsel, Lucetta. Gentle girl, assist me;
And ev'n in kind love I do conjure thee--
Who art the table wherein all my thoughts
Are visibly charactered and engraved--
To lesson me and tell me some good mean
How with my honor I may undertake
Alas, the way is wearisome and long.
To measure kingdoms with his feeble steps;
Much less shall she that hath Love's wings to fly,
And when the flight is made to one so dear,
Of such divine perfection, as Sir Proteus.
Better forbear till Proteus make return.
Pity the dearth that I have pined in
By longing for that food so long a time.
Didst thou but know the inly touch of love,
Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow
As seek to quench the fire of love with words.
But qualify the fire's extreme rage,
Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.
The more thou damm'st it up, the more it burns.
The current that with gentle murmur glides,
Thou know'st, being stopped, impatiently doth rage,
But when his fair course is not hindered,
He makes sweet music with th' enameled stones,
Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
He overtaketh in his pilgrimage;
And so by many winding nooks he strays
With willing sport to the wild ocean.
Then let me go and hinder not my course.
And make a pastime of each weary step
Till the last step have brought me to my love,
And there I'll rest as after much turmoil
But in what habit will you go along?
Not like a woman, for I would prevent
The loose encounters of lascivious men.
Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds
As may beseem some well-reputed page.
Why, then, your Ladyship must cut your hair.
No, girl, I'll knit it up in silken strings
With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots.
To be fantastic may become a youth
Of greater time than I shall show to be.
What fashion, madam, shall I make your breeches?
That fits as well as "Tell me, good my lord,
What compass will you wear your farthingale?"
Why, ev'n what fashion thou best likes, Lucetta.
You must needs have them with a codpiece, madam.
Out, out, Lucetta. That will be ill-favored.
Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.
Lucetta, as thou lov'st me, let me have
What thou think'st meet and is most mannerly.
But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me
For undertaking so unstaid a journey?
If you think so, then stay at home and go not.
Then never dream on infamy, but go.
If Proteus like your journey when you come,
No matter who's displeased when you are gone.
That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear.
And instances of infinite of love
Warrant me welcome to my Proteus.
All these are servants to deceitful men.
Base men that use them to so base effect!
But truer stars did govern Proteus' birth.
His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles,
His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,
His tears pure messengers sent from his heart,
His heart as far from fraud as heaven from Earth.
Pray heav'n he prove so when you come to him.
Now, as thou lov'st me, do him not that wrong
To bear a hard opinion of his truth.
Only deserve my love by loving him.
And presently go with me to my chamber
To take a note of what I stand in need of
To furnish me upon my longing journey.
All that is mine I leave at thy dispose,
My goods, my lands, my reputation.
Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence.
Come, answer not, but to it presently.
Sir Thurio, give us leave, I pray, awhile;
We have some secrets to confer about.	
Now tell me, Proteus, what's your will with me?
My gracious lord, that which I would discover
The law of friendship bids me to conceal,
But when I call to mind your gracious favors
Done to me, undeserving as I am,
My duty pricks me on to utter that
Which else no worldly good should draw from me.
Know, worthy prince, Sir Valentine my friend
This night intends to steal away your daughter;
Myself am one made privy to the plot.
On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates,
And should she thus be stol'n away from you,
It would be much vexation to your age.
Thus, for my duty's sake, I rather chose
To cross my friend in his intended drift
Than, by concealing it, heap on your head
Being unprevented, to your timeless grave.
Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care,
Which to requite command me while I live.
This love of theirs myself have often seen,
Haply when they have judged me fast asleep,
And oftentimes have purposed to forbid
Sir Valentine her company and my court.
But fearing lest my jealous aim might err
And so, unworthily, disgrace the man--
That which thyself hast now disclosed to me.
And that thou mayst perceive my fear of this,
Knowing that tender youth is soon suggested,
The key whereof myself have ever kept,
And thence she cannot be conveyed away.
Know, noble lord, they have devised a mean
How he her chamber-window will ascend
And with a corded ladder fetch her down;
For which the youthful lover now is gone,
And this way comes he with it presently,
Where, if it please you, you may intercept him.
But, good my lord, do it so cunningly
That my discovery be not aimed at;
For love of you, not hate unto my friend,
Hath made me publisher of this pretense.
Upon mine honor, he shall never know
That I had any light from thee of this.
Adieu, my lord. Sir Valentine is coming.
Sir Valentine, whither away so fast?
Please it your Grace, there is a messenger
That stays to bear my letters to my friends,
And I am going to deliver them.
The tenor of them doth but signify
My health and happy being at your court.
Nay then, no matter. Stay with me awhile;
That touch me near, wherein thou must be secret.
To match my friend Sir Thurio to my daughter.
Were rich and honorable. Besides, the gentleman
Is full of virtue, bounty, worth, and qualities
Beseeming such a wife as your fair daughter.
Cannot your Grace win her to fancy him?
No. Trust me, she is peevish, sullen, froward,
Proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty,
Neither regarding that she is my child
Nor fearing me as if I were her father;
And may I say to thee, this pride of hers,
Upon advice, hath drawn my love from her,
And where I thought the remnant of mine age
Should have been cherished by her childlike duty,
And turn her out to who will take her in.
Then let her beauty be her wedding dower,
For me and my possessions she esteems not.
What would your Grace have me to do in this?
There is a lady in Verona here
Whom I affect; but she is nice, and coy,
And nought esteems my aged eloquence.
Now therefore would I have thee to my tutor--
For long agone I have forgot to court;
Besides, the fashion of the time is changed--
How and which way I may bestow myself
To be regarded in her sun-bright eye.
Win her with gifts if she respect not words;
Dumb jewels often in their silent kind
More than quick words do move a woman's mind.
But she did scorn a present that I sent her.
Send her another; never give her o'er,
For scorn at first makes after-love the more.
If she do frown, 'tis not in hate of you,
But rather to beget more love in you.
If she do chide, 'tis not to have you gone,
Forwhy the fools are mad if left alone.
Take no repulse, whatever she doth say;
For "get you gone" she doth not mean "away."
Flatter and praise, commend, extol their graces;
Though ne'er so black, say they have angels' faces.
That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man
If with his tongue he cannot win a woman.
But she I mean is promised by her friends
Unto a youthful gentleman of worth
And kept severely from resort of men,
That no man hath access by day to her.
Why, then, I would resort to her by night.
Ay, but the doors be locked and keys kept safe,
That no man hath recourse to her by night.
What lets but one may enter at her window?
Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground,
And built so shelving that one cannot climb it
Without apparent hazard of his life.
Why, then a ladder quaintly made of cords
To cast up, with a pair of anchoring hooks,
Would serve to scale another Hero's tower,
So bold Leander would adventure it.
Now, as thou art a gentleman of blood,
Advise me where I may have such a ladder.
When would you use it? Pray sir, tell me that.
This very night; for love is like a child
That longs for everything that he can come by.
By seven o'clock I'll get you such a ladder.
But hark thee: I will go to her alone;
How shall I best convey the ladder thither?
It will be light, my lord, that you may bear it
Under a cloak that is of any length.
Ay, my good lord.
Why, any cloak will serve the turn, my lord.
How shall I fashion me to wear a cloak?
What letter is this same? What's here?  To
Sylvia.
And here an engine fit for my proceeding.
What's here?
Why, Phaeton--for thou art Merops' son--
Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly car
And with thy daring folly burn the world?
Wilt thou reach stars because they shine on thee?
Go, base intruder, overweening slave,
Bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates
And think my patience, more than thy desert,
Is privilege for thy departure hence.
Thank me for this more than for all the favors
Which all too much I have bestowed on thee.
But if thou linger in my territories
Longer than swiftest expedition
Will give thee time to leave our royal court,
By heaven, my wrath shall far exceed the love
Begone. I will not hear thy vain excuse,
But, as thou lov'st thy life, make speed from hence.
And why not death, rather than living torment?
To die is to be banished from myself,
And Sylvia is myself; banished from her
Is self from self--a deadly banishment.
What light is light if Sylvia be not seen?
What joy is joy if Sylvia be not by--
Unless it be to think that she is by
And feed upon the shadow of perfection?
Except I be by Sylvia in the night,
There is no music in the nightingale.
Unless I look on Sylvia in the day,
There is no day for me to look upon.
She is my essence, and I leave to be
If I be not by her fair influence
Fostered, illumined, cherished, kept alive.
Tarry I here, I but attend on death,
But fly I hence, I fly away from life.
Sirrah, I say forbear.--Friend Valentine, a word.
My ears are stopped and cannot hear good news,
So much of bad already hath possessed them.
Then in dumb silence will I bury mine,
For they are harsh, untunable, and bad.
No Valentine indeed for sacred Sylvia.
Hath she forsworn me?
No Valentine if Sylvia have forsworn me.
What is your news?
That thou art banished--O, that's the news--
From hence, from Sylvia, and from me thy friend.
And now excess of it will make me surfeit.
Doth Sylvia know that I am banished?
Ay, ay, and she hath offered to the doom--
Which unreversed stands in effectual force--
Those at her father's churlish feet she tendered,
With them, upon her knees, her humble self,
Wringing her hands, whose whiteness so became
As if but now they waxed pale for woe.
But neither bended knees, pure hands held up,
Sad sighs, deep groans, nor silver-shedding tears
Could penetrate her uncompassionate sire;
But Valentine, if he be ta'en, must die.
Besides, her intercession chafed him so,
When she for thy repeal was suppliant,
That to close prison he commanded her
With many bitter threats of biding there.
No more, unless the next word that thou speak'st
Have some malignant power upon my life.
If so, I pray thee breathe it in mine ear
As ending anthem of my endless dolor.
Cease to lament for that thou canst not help,
And study help for that which thou lament'st.
Time is the nurse and breeder of all good.
Here, if thou stay, thou canst not see thy love;
Besides, thy staying will abridge thy life.
Hope is a lover's staff; walk hence with that
And manage it against despairing thoughts.
Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence,
Which, being writ to me, shall be delivered
Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love.
The time now serves not to expostulate.
Come, I'll convey thee through the city gate
And, ere I part with thee, confer at large
Of all that may concern thy love affairs.
As thou lov'st Sylvia, though not for thyself,
Regard thy danger, and along with me.
Bid him make haste and meet me at the North
Gate.
Go, sirrah, find him out.--Come, Valentine.
Mastership?
This proves that thou canst not read.
Read on.
What's next?
Sir Thurio, fear not but that she will love you
Now Valentine is banished from her sight.
Since his exile she hath despised me most,
Forsworn my company and railed at me,
That I am desperate of obtaining her.
This weak impress of love is as a figure
Trenched in ice, which with an hour's heat
Dissolves to water and doth lose his form.
And worthless Valentine shall be forgot.
How now, Sir Proteus? Is your countryman,
According to our proclamation, gone?
My daughter takes his going grievously.
So I believe, but Thurio thinks not so.
Proteus, the good conceit I hold of thee,
For thou hast shown some sign of good desert,
Makes me the better to confer with thee.
Longer than I prove loyal to your Grace
Let me not live to look upon your Grace.
Thou know'st how willingly I would effect
The match between Sir Thurio and my daughter?
And also, I think, thou art not ignorant
How she opposes her against my will?
She did, my lord, when Valentine was here.
Ay, and perversely she persevers so.
What might we do to make the girl forget
The love of Valentine, and love Sir Thurio?
The best way is to slander Valentine
With falsehood, cowardice, and poor descent,
Three things that women highly hold in hate.
Ay, but she'll think that it is spoke in hate.
Ay, if his enemy deliver it.
Therefore it must with circumstance be spoken
By one whom she esteemeth as his friend.
Then you must undertake to slander him.
And that, my lord, I shall be loath to do.
Especially against his very friend.
Where your good word cannot advantage him,
Your slander never can endamage him;
Therefore the office is indifferent,
Being entreated to it by your friend.
You have prevailed, my lord. If I can do it
By aught that I can speak in his dispraise,
She shall not long continue love to him.
But say this weed her love from Valentine,
It follows not that she will love Sir Thurio.
Therefore, as you unwind her love from him,
Lest it should ravel and be good to none,
You must provide to bottom it on me,
Which must be done by praising me as much
As you in worth dispraise Sir Valentine.
And, Proteus, we dare trust you in this kind
Because we know, on Valentine's report,
You are already Love's firm votary
And cannot soon revolt and change your mind.
Upon this warrant shall you have access
Where you with Sylvia may confer at large--
For she is lumpish, heavy, melancholy,
And, for your friend's sake, will be glad of you--
Where you may temper her by your persuasion
To hate young Valentine and love my friend.
As much as I can do I will effect.--
But you, Sir Thurio, are not sharp enough.
You must lay lime to tangle her desires
By wailful sonnets, whose composed rhymes
Should be full-fraught with serviceable vows.
Ay, much is the force of heaven-bred poesy.
Say that upon the altar of her beauty
You sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart.
Write till your ink be dry, and with your tears
Moist it again, and frame some feeling line
That may discover such integrity.
For Orpheus' lute was strung with poets' sinews,
Whose golden touch could soften steel and stones,
Make tigers tame, and huge leviathans
Forsake unsounded deeps to dance on sands.
After your dire-lamenting elegies,
Visit by night your lady's chamber window
With some sweet consort; to their instruments
Tune a deploring dump; the night's dead silence
Will well become such sweet complaining
This, or else nothing, will inherit her.
This discipline shows thou hast been in love.
And thy advice this night I'll put in practice.
Therefore, sweet Proteus, my direction-giver,
Let us into the city presently
To sort some gentlemen well-skilled in music.
To give the onset to thy good advice.
We'll wait upon your Grace till after supper
And afterward determine our proceedings.
Even now about it! I will pardon you.
Fellows, stand fast. I see a passenger.
If there be ten, shrink not, but down with 'em.
Stand, sir, and throw us that you have about you.
If not, we'll make you sit, and rifle you.
Sir, we are undone; these are the villains
That all the travelers do fear so much.
That's not so, sir. We are your enemies.
Ay, by my beard, will we, for he is a proper man.
Then know that I have little wealth to lose.
My riches are these poor habiliments,
Of which, if you should here disfurnish me,
You take the sum and substance that I have.
Some sixteen months, and longer might have stayed
If crooked fortune had not thwarted me.
For that which now torments me to rehearse;
But yet I slew him manfully in fight
Without false vantage or base treachery.
Why, ne'er repent it if it were done so;
But were you banished for so small a fault?
My youthful travel therein made me happy,
Or else I often had been miserable.
By the bare scalp of Robin Hood's fat friar,
This fellow were a king for our wild faction.
Tell us this: have you anything to take to?
Know then that some of us are gentlemen,
Such as the fury of ungoverned youth
Thrust from the company of awful men.
Myself was from Verona banished
For practicing to steal away a lady,
An heir and near allied unto the Duke.
And I from Mantua, for a gentleman
Who, in my mood, I stabbed unto the heart.
And I for such like petty crimes as these.
But to the purpose: for we cite our faults
That they may hold excused our lawless lives,
And partly seeing you are beautified
With goodly shape, and by your own report
As we do in our quality much want--
Indeed because you are a banished man,
Therefore, above the rest, we parley to you.
Are you content to be our general,
To make a virtue of necessity
And live as we do in this wilderness?
What sayst thou? Wilt thou be of our consort?
Say ay, and be the captain of us all;
We'll do thee homage and be ruled by thee,
Love thee as our commander and our king.
But if thou scorn our courtesy, thou diest.
Thou shalt not live to brag what we have offered.
Provided that you do no outrages
On silly women or poor passengers.
No, we detest such vile base practices.
Come, go with us; we'll bring thee to our crews
And show thee all the treasure we have got,
Which, with ourselves, all rest at thy dispose.
Already have I been false to Valentine,
And now I must be as unjust to Thurio.
Under the color of commending him,
But Sylvia is too fair, too true, too holy
To be corrupted with my worthless gifts.
When I protest true loyalty to her,
She twits me with my falsehood to my friend;
When to her beauty I commend my vows,
She bids me think how I have been forsworn
In breaking faith with Julia, whom I loved;
And notwithstanding all her sudden quips,
The least whereof would quell a lover's hope,
Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love,
The more it grows and fawneth on her still.
But here comes Thurio. Now must we to her
And give some evening music to her ear.
How now, Sir Proteus, are you crept before us?
Ay, gentle Thurio, for you know that love
Will creep in service where it cannot go.
Ay, but I hope, sir, that you love not here.
Sir, but I do, or else I would be hence.
Who, Sylvia?
Let's tune, and to it lustily awhile.
Song.
How do you, man? The music likes you not.
But, host, doth this Sir Proteus, that we talk on,
Often resort unto this gentlewoman?
Sir Thurio, fear not you. I will so plead
That you shall say my cunning drift excels.
Where meet we?
Madam, good even to your Ladyship.
Who is that that spake?
One, lady, if you knew his pure heart's truth,
You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.
Sir Proteus, gentle lady, and your servant.
What's your will?
You have your wish: my will is even this,
That presently you hie you home to bed.
Thou subtle, perjured, false, disloyal man,
Think'st thou I am so shallow, so conceitless,
To be seduced by thy flattery,
That hast deceived so many with thy vows?
Return, return, and make thy love amends.
For me, by this pale queen of night I swear,
That I despise thee for thy wrongful suit
And by and by intend to chide myself
Even for this time I spend in talking to thee.
But she is dead.
For I am sure she is not buried.
Say that she be; yet Valentine thy friend
Survives, to whom, thyself art witness,
To wrong him with thy importunacy?
And so suppose am I, for in his grave,
Assure thyself, my love is buried.
Sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth.
Go to thy lady's grave and call hers thence,
Or, at the least, in hers sepulcher thine.
Madam, if your heart be so obdurate,
Vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love,
The picture that is hanging in your chamber;
To that I'll speak, to that I'll sigh and weep,
For since the substance of your perfect self
Is else devoted, I am but a shadow;
And to your shadow will I make true love.
If 'twere a substance you would sure deceive it
And make it but a shadow, as I am.
But since your falsehood shall become you well
To worship shadows and adore false shapes,
Send to me in the morning, and I'll send it.
And so, good rest.	
That wait for execution in the morn.	
Not so; but it hath been the longest night
That e'er I watched, and the most heaviest.
This is the hour that Madam Sylvia
Entreated me to call and know her mind;
There's some great matter she'd employ me in.
Madam, madam!
One that attends your Ladyship's command.
Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morrow.
As many, worthy lady, to yourself.
According to your Ladyship's impose,
It is your pleasure to command me in.
Think not I flatter, for I swear I do not--
Valiant, wise, remorseful, well accomplished.
Thou art not ignorant what dear good will
Nor how my father would enforce me marry
Vain Thurio, whom my very soul abhorred.
Thyself hast loved, and I have heard thee say
No grief did ever come so near thy heart
As when thy lady and thy true love died,
Upon whose grave thou vow'dst pure chastity.
Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine,
To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode;
And for the ways are dangerous to pass,
Upon whose faith and honor I repose.
Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour,
But think upon my grief, a lady's grief,
And on the justice of my flying hence
To keep me from a most unholy match,
Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues.
As full of sorrows as the sea of sands,
To bear me company and go with me;
If not, to hide what I have said to thee,
That I may venture to depart alone.
Madam, I pity much your grievances,
Which, since I know they virtuously are placed,
Recking as little what betideth me
As much I wish all good befortune you.
When will you go?
Where shall I meet you?
Where I intend holy confession.
Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.
Did not I bid thee still mark me, and do as I do?
When didst thou see me heave up my leg and make
Sebastian is thy name? I like thee well
And will employ thee in some service presently.
In what you please. I'll do what I can.
Where have you been these two days loitering?
Go, get thee hence, and find my dog again,
Or ne'er return again into my sight.
Away, I say. Stayest thou to vex me here?
Sebastian, I have entertained thee,
Partly that I have need of such a youth
That can with some discretion do my business--
For 'tis no trusting to yond foolish lout--
But chiefly for thy face and thy behavior,
Which, if my augury deceive me not,
Witness good bringing-up, fortune, and truth.
Therefore, know thou, for this I entertain thee.
Go presently, and take this ring with thee;
Deliver it to Madam Sylvia.
She loved me well delivered it to me.
It seems you loved not her, to leave her token.
She is dead belike?
Because methinks that she loved you as well
As you do love your lady Sylvia.
She dreams on him that has forgot her love;
You dote on her that cares not for your love.
And thinking on it makes me cry "Alas."
Well, give her that ring and therewithal
This letter.  That's her
Your message done, hie home unto my chamber,
Where thou shalt find me sad and solitary.
How many women would do such a message?
Alas, poor Proteus, thou hast entertained
Alas, poor fool, why do I pity him
That with his very heart despiseth me?
Because he loves her, he despiseth me;
Because I love him, I must pity him.
This ring I gave him when he parted from me,
To bind him to remember my good will;
And now am I, unhappy messenger,
To plead for that which I would not obtain,
To carry that which I would have refused,
To praise his faith, which I would have dispraised.
But cannot be true servant to my master
Unless I prove false traitor to myself.
Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly
As--Heaven it knows!--I would not have him
To bring me where to speak with Madam Sylvia.
What would you with her, if that I be she?
If you be she, I do entreat your patience
To hear me speak the message I am sent on.
Go, give your master this. Tell him from me,
One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget,
Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.
Pardon me, madam, I have unadvised
Delivered you a paper that I should not.
This is the letter to your Ladyship.
It may not be; good madam, pardon me.
And full of new-found oaths, which he will break
As easily as I do tear his paper.
Madam, he sends your Ladyship this ring.
The more shame for him, that he sends it me;
For I have heard him say a thousand times
His Julia gave it him at his departure.
Though his false finger have profaned the ring,
Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong.
Poor gentlewoman, my master wrongs her much.
Almost as well as I do know myself.
To think upon her woes, I do protest
That I have wept a hundred several times.
Belike she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her?
She hath been fairer, madam, than she is;
When she did think my master loved her well,
She, in my judgment, was as fair as you.
But since she did neglect her looking-glass
And threw her sun-expelling mask away,
The air hath starved the roses in her cheeks
And pinched the lily tincture of her face,
That now she is become as black as I.
About my stature; for at Pentecost,
When all our pageants of delight were played,
Our youth got me to play the woman's part,
And I was trimmed in Madam Julia's gown,
Which served me as fit, by all men's judgments,
As if the garment had been made for me;
Therefore I know she is about my height.
And at that time I made her weep agood,
For I did play a lamentable part;
Madam, 'twas Ariadne, passioning
For Theseus' perjury and unjust flight,
Which I so lively acted with my tears
That my poor mistress, moved therewithal,
Wept bitterly; and would I might be dead
If I in thought felt not her very sorrow.
She is beholding to thee, gentle youth.
Alas, poor lady, desolate and left!
Here, youth, there is my purse.
For thy sweet mistress' sake, because thou lov'st her.
Farewell.
And she shall thank you for 't if e'er you know her.
Since she respects my mistress' love so much.--
Alas, how love can trifle with itself!
Here is her picture; let me see. I think
If I had such a tire, this face of mine
Were full as lovely as is this of hers;
And yet the painter flattered her a little,
Unless I flatter with myself too much.
Her hair is auburn; mine is perfect yellow;
If that be all the difference in his love,
Her eyes are gray as glass, and so are mine.
Ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high.
What should it be that he respects in her
But I can make respective in myself
If this fond Love were not a blinded god?
Come, shadow, come, and take this shadow up,
For 'tis thy rival. O, thou senseless form,
Thou shalt be worshipped, kissed, loved, and
And were there sense in his idolatry,
My substance should be statue in thy stead.
That used me so, or else, by Jove I vow,
To make my master out of love with thee.
The sun begins to gild the western sky,
And now it is about the very hour
That Sylvia at Friar Patrick's cell should meet me.
She will not fail, for lovers break not hours,
Unless it be to come before their time,
So much they spur their expedition.
See where she comes.--Lady, a happy evening.
Amen, amen. Go on, good Eglamour,
Out at the postern by the abbey wall.
Fear not. The forest is not three leagues off;
If we recover that, we are sure enough.
Sebastian.]
Sir Proteus, what says Sylvia to my suit?
And yet she takes exceptions at your person.
But love will not be spurred to what it loathes.
Nay, then the wanton lies; my face is black.
But pearls are fair, and the old saying is,
Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.
For I had rather wink than look on them.
But well when I discourse of love and peace.
But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.
She needs not when she knows it cowardice.
That they are out by lease.
How now, Sir Proteus?--How now, Thurio?
Which of you saw Eglamour of late?
Not I.
Why, then, she's fled unto that peasant, Valentine,
And Eglamour is in her company.
As he, in penance, wandered through the forest;
Him he knew well and guessed that it was she,
But, being masked, he was not sure of it.
Besides, she did intend confession
At Patrick's cell this even, and there she was not.
These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence.
Therefore I pray you stand not to discourse,
But mount you presently and meet with me
Upon the rising of the mountain foot
That leads toward Mantua, whither they are fled.
Dispatch, sweet gentlemen, and follow me.
Why, this it is to be a peevish girl
That flies her fortune when it follows her.
Than for the love of reckless Sylvia.	
And I will follow, more for Sylvia's love
Than hate of Eglamour that goes with her.
And I will follow, more to cross that love
Than hate for Sylvia, that is gone for love.
Come, come, be patient. We must bring you to our
Have learned me how to brook this patiently.
Where is the gentleman that was with her?
Being nimble-footed, he hath outrun us,
But Moyses and Valerius follow him.
Go thou with her to the west end of the wood;
There is our captain. We'll follow him that's fled.
The thicket is beset; he cannot 'scape.
Come, I must bring you to our captain's cave.
Fear not; he bears an honorable mind
And will not use a woman lawlessly.
How use doth breed a habit in a man!
This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods,
Here can I sit alone, unseen of any,
And to the nightingale's complaining notes
Tune my distresses and record my woes.
Leave not the mansion so long tenantless
Lest, growing ruinous, the building fall
And leave no memory of what it was.
Repair me with thy presence, Sylvia;
Thou gentle nymph, cherish thy forlorn swain.
What hallowing and what stir is this today?
These are my mates, that make their wills their law,
Have some unhappy passenger in chase.
They love me well, yet I have much to do
To keep them from uncivil outrages.
Withdraw thee, Valentine. Who's this comes here?
Sebastian.]
Madam, this service I have done for you--
Though you respect not aught your servant doth--
To hazard life, and rescue you from him
That would have forced your honor and your love.
Vouchsafe me for my meed but one fair look;
And less than this I am sure you cannot give.
How like a dream is this I see and hear!
Love, lend me patience to forbear awhile.
Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came,
But by my coming, I have made you happy.
By thy approach thou mak'st me most unhappy.
And me, when he approacheth to your presence.
Had I been seized by a hungry lion,
Rather than have false Proteus rescue me.
Whose life's as tender to me as my soul;
And full as much, for more there cannot be,
Therefore begone; solicit me no more.
What dangerous action, stood it next to death,
Would I not undergo for one calm look!
When women cannot love where they're beloved.
When Proteus cannot love where he's beloved.
Read over Julia's heart, thy first best love,
For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith
Into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths
Descended into perjury to love me.
Thou hast no faith left now unless thou 'dst two,
And that's far worse than none; better have none
Than plural faith, which is too much by one.
Thou counterfeit to thy true friend!
Who respects friend?
Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words
Can no way change you to a milder form,
And love you 'gainst the nature of love--force you.
Ruffian, let go that rude uncivil touch,
Thou friend of an ill fashion.
Thou common friend, that's without faith or love,
For such is a friend now. Treacherous man,
Thou hast beguiled my hopes; nought but mine eye
Could have persuaded me. Now I dare not say
Who should be trusted when one's right hand
Is perjured to the bosom? Proteus,
But count the world a stranger for thy sake.
The private wound is deepest. O, time most
Forgive me, Valentine. If hearty sorrow
Be a sufficient ransom for offense,
As e'er I did commit.
And once again I do receive thee honest.
Who by repentance is not satisfied
Is nor of heaven nor Earth, for these are pleased;
By penitence th' Eternal's wrath's appeased.
And that my love may appear plain and free,
All that was mine in Sylvia I give thee.
Why, wag, how now? What's the matter? Look up.
Speak.
Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.
This is the ring you sent to Sylvia.
But how cam'st thou by this ring? At my depart
And Julia herself did give it me,
And Julia herself hath brought it hither.
Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths
And entertained 'em deeply in her heart.
How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root!
Be thou ashamed that I have took upon me
Such an immodest raiment, if shame live
In a disguise of love.
It is the lesser blot, modesty finds,
Women to change their shapes than men their minds.
But constant, he were perfect; that one error
Fills him with faults, makes him run through all th'
Inconstancy falls off ere it begins.
What is in Sylvia's face but I may spy
More fresh in Julia's, with a constant eye?
Let me be blest to make this happy close.
Bear witness, heaven, I have my wish forever.
And I mine.
Forbear, forbear, I say. It is my lord the Duke.
Your Grace is welcome to a man disgraced,
Banished Valentine.
Sir Valentine?
Thurio, give back, or else embrace thy death;
Come not within the measure of my wrath.
Do not name Sylvia thine; if once again,
Verona shall not hold thee. Here she stands;
Take but possession of her with a touch--
Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I.
His body for a girl that loves him not.
The more degenerate and base art thou
To make such means for her as thou hast done,
And leave her on such slight conditions.--
Now, by the honor of my ancestry,
And think thee worthy of an empress' love.
Know, then, I here forget all former griefs,
Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again,
Plead a new state in thy unrivaled merit,
To which I thus subscribe: Sir Valentine,
Thou art a gentleman, and well derived;
Take thou thy Sylvia, for thou hast deserved her.
To grant one boon that I shall ask of you.
These banished men, that I have kept withal,
Are men endued with worthy qualities.
Forgive them what they have committed here,
And let them be recalled from their exile;
They are reformed, civil, full of good,
And fit for great employment, worthy lord.
Thou hast prevailed; I pardon them and thee.
Dispose of them as thou know'st their deserts.
Come, let us go; we will include all jars
With triumphs, mirth, and rare solemnity.
And as we walk along, I dare be bold
With our discourse to make your Grace to smile.
Please you, I'll tell you as we pass along,
That you will wonder what hath fortuned.--
Come, Proteus, 'tis your penance but to hear
The story of your loves discovered.
That done, our day of marriage shall be yours,
One feast, one house, one mutual happiness.
In sooth I know not why I am so sad.
It wearies me, you say it wearies you.
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
What stuff 'tis made of, whereof it is born,
And such a want-wit sadness makes of me
That I have much ado to know myself.
Your mind is tossing on the ocean,
There where your argosies with portly sail
Or, as it were, the pageants of the sea)
Do overpeer the petty traffickers
That curtsy to them, do them reverence,
As they fly by them with their woven wings.
Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections would
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
Piring in maps for ports and piers and roads;
And every object that might make me fear
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
Would make me sad.
Would blow me to an ague when I thought
What harm a wind too great might do at sea.
But I should think of shallows and of flats,
And see my wealthy Andrew docked in sand,
Vailing her high top lower than her ribs
To kiss her burial. Should I go to church
And see the holy edifice of stone
And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
Which, touching but my gentle vessel's side,
Would scatter all her spices on the stream,
Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks,
And, in a word, but even now worth this
And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
That such a thing bechanced would make me sad?
But tell not me: I know Antonio
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.
Believe me, no. I thank my fortune for it,
My ventures are not in one bottom trusted,
Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
Upon the fortune of this present year:
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.
Why then you are in love.
Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad
Because you are not merry; and 'twere as easy
For you to laugh and leap, and say you are merry
Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed
Janus,
Nature hath framed strange fellows in her time:
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes
And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper,
And other of such vinegar aspect
That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile
Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.
Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
Gratiano, and Lorenzo. Fare you well.
We leave you now with better company.
If worthier friends had not prevented me.
Your worth is very dear in my regard.
And you embrace th' occasion to depart.
Good morrow, my good lords.
Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? Say,
You grow exceeding strange. Must it be so?
We'll make our leisures to attend on yours.
My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio,
We two will leave you. But at dinner time
You look not well, Signior Antonio.
You have too much respect upon the world.
They lose it that do buy it with much care.
Believe me, you are marvelously changed.
And mine a sad one.
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come,
And let my liver rather heat with wine
Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.
Why should a man whose blood is warm within
Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster?
Sleep when he wakes? And creep into the jaundice
By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio
There are a sort of men whose visages
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond
And do a willful stillness entertain
With purpose to be dressed in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,
As who should say "I am Sir Oracle,
And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark."
That therefore only are reputed wise
For saying nothing, when, I am very sure,
If they should speak, would almost damn those ears
Which, hearing them, would call their brothers
But fish not with this melancholy bait
For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.--
Come, good Lorenzo.--Fare you well a while.
Well, we will leave you then till dinner time.
For Gratiano never lets me speak.
Well, keep me company but two years more,
Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own
Fare you well. I'll grow a talker for this gear.
Thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable
In a neat's tongue dried and a maid not vendible.
Well, tell me now what lady is the same
To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage,
That you today promised to tell me of?
How much I have disabled mine estate
By something showing a more swelling port
Than my faint means would grant continuance.
Nor do I now make moan to be abridged
From such a noble rate. But my chief care
Is to come fairly off from the great debts
Wherein my time, something too prodigal,
Hath left me gaged. To you, Antonio,
And from your love I have a warranty
To unburden all my plots and purposes
How to get clear of all the debts I owe.
And if it stand, as you yourself still do,
Within the eye of honor, be assured
My purse, my person, my extremest means
Lie all unlocked to your occasions.
In my school days, when I had lost one shaft,
The selfsame way with more advised watch
To find the other forth; and by adventuring both
Because what follows is pure innocence.
That which I owe is lost. But if you please
To shoot another arrow that self way
Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
As I will watch the aim, or to find both
Or bring your latter hazard back again,
And thankfully rest debtor for the first.
You know me well, and herein spend but time
To wind about my love with circumstance;
And out of doubt you do me now more wrong
In making question of my uttermost
Than if you had made waste of all I have.
Then do but say to me what I should do
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
And I am prest unto it. Therefore speak.
In Belmont is a lady richly left,
And she is fair, and, fairer than that word,
Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes
Her name is Portia, nothing undervalued
To Cato's daughter, Brutus' Portia.
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
For the four winds blow in from every coast
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strond,
And many Jasons come in quest of her.
To hold a rival place with one of them,
That I should questionless be fortunate!
Thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea;
Neither have I money nor commodity
To raise a present sum. Therefore go forth:
Try what my credit can in Venice do;
That shall be racked even to the uttermost
To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
Go presently inquire, and so will I,
Where money is, and I no question make
To have it of my trust, or for my sake.
Bon?
Neapolitan's, a better bad habit of frowning than
French, nor Italian; and you will come into the
Saxony's nephew?
When he is best he is a little worse than a man, and
How now, what news?
Come, Nerissa.  Sirrah, go before.--
Whiles we shut the gate upon one wooer, another
Shall I know your answer?
Indies. I understand, moreover, upon the Rialto,
Antonio?
How like a fawning publican he looks!
But more for that in low simplicity
He lends out money gratis and brings down
The rate of usance here with us in Venice.
If I can catch him once upon the hip,
He hates our sacred nation, and he rails,
Even there where merchants most do congregate,
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
Which he calls "interest." Cursed be my tribe
If I forgive him!
And, by the near guess of my memory,
Of full three thousand ducats. What of that?
Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe,
Will furnish me. But soft, how many months
Do you desire?  Rest you fair, good
Your Worship was the last man in our mouths.
Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
By taking nor by giving of excess,
Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
How much you would?
You told me so.--
Well then, your bond. And let me see--but hear
Methoughts you said you neither lend nor borrow
Upon advantage.
When Jacob grazed his Uncle Laban's sheep--
This Jacob from our holy Abram was
The third possessor; ay, he was the third--
And what of him? Did he take interest?
No, not take interest, not, as you would say,
Directly "interest." Mark what Jacob did.
When Laban and himself were compromised
That all the eanlings which were streaked and pied
Should fall as Jacob's hire, the ewes being rank
In end of autumn turned to the rams,
And when the work of generation was
Between these woolly breeders in the act,
The skillful shepherd pilled me certain wands,
And in the doing of the deed of kind
He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes,
Who then conceiving did in eaning time
Fall parti-colored lambs, and those were Jacob's.
This was a way to thrive, and he was blest;
And thrift is blessing if men steal it not.
This was a venture, sir, that Jacob served for,
But swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven.
Was this inserted to make interest good?
Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?
But note me, signior--
Mark you this, Bassanio,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose!
An evil soul producing holy witness
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
Three thousand ducats. 'Tis a good round sum.
Three months from twelve, then let me see, the
Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?
Signior Antonio, many a time and oft
In the Rialto you have rated me
About my moneys and my usances.
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug
You call me misbeliever, cutthroat dog,
And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine,
And all for use of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears you need my help.
Go to, then. You come to me and you say
You, that did void your rheum upon my beard,
And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur
Over your threshold. Moneys is your suit.
What should I say to you? Should I not say
Shall I bend low, and in a bondman's key,
With bated breath and whisp'ring humbleness,
Say this: "Fair sir, you spet on me on Wednesday
You spurned me such a day; another time
You called me 'dog'; and for these courtesies
To spet on thee again, to spurn thee, too.
If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
As to thy friends, for when did friendship take
But lend it rather to thine enemy,
Who, if he break, thou mayst with better face
Exact the penalty.
Forget the shames that you have stained me with,
Supply your present wants, and take no doit
Of usance for my moneys, and you'll not hear me!
This is kind I offer.
Go with me to a notary, seal me there
Your single bond; and in a merry sport,
If you repay me not on such a day,
In such a place, such sum or sums as are
Expressed in the condition, let the forfeit
Be nominated for an equal pound
Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
In what part of your body pleaseth me.
Content, in faith. I'll seal to such a bond,
And say there is much kindness in the Jew.
You shall not seal to such a bond for me!
Why, fear not, man, I will not forfeit it!
Within these two months--that's a month before
This bond expires--I do expect return
Of thrice three times the value of this bond.
Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
The thoughts of others! Pray you tell me this:
If he should break his day, what should I gain
By the exaction of the forfeiture?
Is not so estimable, profitable neither,
As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say,
To buy his favor I extend this friendship.
If he will take it, so. If not, adieu;
And for my love I pray you wrong me not.
Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond.
Then meet me forthwith at the notary's.
Give him direction for this merry bond,
And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
See to my house left in the fearful guard
Of an unthrifty knave, and presently
The Hebrew will turn Christian; he grows kind.
Come on, in this there can be no dismay;
My ships come home a month before the day.
Portia, Nerissa, and their train.]
Mislike me not for my complexion,
The shadowed livery of the burnished sun,
To whom I am a neighbor and near bred.
Bring me the fairest creature northward born,
Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles,
And let us make incision for your love
To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
Hath feared the valiant; by my love I swear
The best regarded virgins of our clime
Have loved it too. I would not change this hue
Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.
In terms of choice I am not solely led
By nice direction of a maiden's eyes;
Besides, the lott'ry of my destiny
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing.
But if my father had not scanted me
And hedged me by his wit to yield myself
His wife who wins me by that means I told you,
Yourself, renowned prince, then stood as fair
As any comer I have looked on yet
For my affection.
Therefore I pray you lead me to the caskets
To try my fortune. By this scimitar
That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince,
That won three fields of Sultan Solyman,
Outbrave the heart most daring on the Earth,
Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear,
Yea, mock the lion when he roars for prey,
To win thee, lady. But, alas the while!
If Hercules and Lychas play at dice
Which is the better man, the greater throw
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand;
So is Alcides beaten by his page,
And so may I, blind Fortune leading me,
Miss that which one unworthier may attain,
And die with grieving.
And either not attempt to choose at all
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong
Never to speak to lady afterward
In way of marriage. Therefore be advised.
Nor will not. Come, bring me unto my chance.
First, forward to the temple. After dinner
Your hazard shall be made.
To make me blest--or cursed'st among men!
Lancelet Gobbo, good Lancelet," or "good Gobbo,"
Well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my
Lancelet, being an honest man's son"--or rather,
To be ruled by my conscience, I should stay with the
Jew my master, who  is a kind
Can you tell me whether one Lancelet, that dwells
Mark me now, now will I raise the waters.--Talk
Lancelet, father, for the young gentleman, according
Sisters Three, and such branches of learning, is
But I pray you tell me, is my boy, God rest his
Truth will come to light, murder cannot be hid
Lancelet my boy.
Dobbin's tail grows backward. I am sure he had
How 'gree you now?
Give him a present! Give him a halter. I am
Give me your present to one Master Bassanio, who
Jew, and have a desire, as my father shall specify--
Shylock thy master spoke with me this day,
And hath preferred thee, if it be preferment
To leave a rich Jew's service, to become
The follower of so poor a gentleman.
Thou speak'st it well.--Go, father, with thy son.--
Take leave of thy old master, and inquire
My lodging out.  Give him a livery
More guarded than his fellows'. See it done.
Father, come. I'll take my leave of the Jew in the
These things being bought and orderly bestowed,
Return in haste, for I do feast tonight
My best esteemed acquaintance. Hie thee, go.
My best endeavors shall be done herein.
Why then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano,
Thou art too wild, too rude and bold of voice--
Parts that become thee happily enough,
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults.
But where thou art not known--why, there they
Something too liberal. Pray thee take pain
To allay with some cold drops of modesty
Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior
And lose my hopes.
If I do not put on a sober habit,
Talk with respect, and swear but now and then,
Wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely,
Nay more, while grace is saying, hood mine eyes
Thus with my hat, and sigh and say "amen,"
Use all the observance of civility
Like one well studied in a sad ostent
To please his grandam, never trust me more.
Nay, but I bar tonight. You shall not gauge me
By what we do tonight.
Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends
That purpose merriment. But fare you well.
And I must to Lorenzo and the rest.
But we will visit you at supper time.
Our house is hell and thou, a merry devil,
Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness.
But fare thee well. There is a ducat for thee,
And, Lancelet, soon at supper shalt thou see
Lorenzo, who is thy new master's guest.
Give him this letter, do it secretly,
And so farewell. I would not have my father
See me in talk with thee.
But adieu. These foolish drops do something drown
Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
To be ashamed to be my father's child?
But though I am a daughter to his blood,
If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife,
Become a Christian and thy loving wife.
Nay, we will slink away in supper time,
Disguise us at my lodging, and return
All in an hour.
We have not made good preparation.
We have not spoke us yet of torchbearers.
And better in my mind not undertook.
To furnish us.
Friend Lancelet, what's the news?
And whiter than the paper it writ on
Is the fair hand that writ.
Hold here, take this.  Tell gentle
Jessica
Go, gentlemen,
Will you prepare you for this masque tonight?
Ay, marry, I'll be gone about it straight.
And so will I.
At Gratiano's lodging some hour hence.
Was not that letter from fair Jessica?
How I shall take her from her father's house,
What gold and jewels she is furnished with,
What page's suit she hath in readiness.
If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven,
It will be for his gentle daughter's sake;
And never dare misfortune cross her foot
Unless she do it under this excuse,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew.
Come, go with me. Peruse this as thou goest;
Fair Jessica shall be my torchbearer.
Well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge,
The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio.--
What, Jessica!--Thou shalt not gormandize
As thou hast done with me--what, Jessica!--
And sleep, and snore, and rend apparel out.--
Why, Jessica, I say!
Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.
There are my keys.--But wherefore should I go?
But yet I'll go in hate, to feed upon
The prodigal Christian.--Jessica, my girl,
Look to my house.--I am right loath to go.
There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest,
For I did dream of money bags tonight.
Black Monday last, at six o'clock i' th' morning,
What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica,
Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum
And the vile squealing of the wry-necked fife,
Clamber not you up to the casements then,
Nor thrust your head into the public street
To gaze on Christian fools with varnished faces,
But stop my house's ears .
Let not the sound of shallow fopp'ry enter
My sober house. By Jacob's staff I swear
But I will go.--Go you before me, sirrah.
Say I will come.
There will come a Christian by
Will be worth a Jewess' eye.	
What says that fool of Hagar's offspring, ha?
His words were "Farewell, mistress," nothing else.
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder,
Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day
More than the wildcat. Drones hive not with me,
Therefore I part with him, and part with him
To one that I would have him help to waste
His borrowed purse. Well, Jessica, go in.
Perhaps I will return immediately.
Do as I bid you. Shut doors after you.
Fast bind, fast find--
Farewell, and if my fortune be not crossed,
This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo
Desired us to make stand.
And it is marvel he outdwells his hour,
For lovers ever run before the clock.
To seal love's bonds new-made than they are wont
To keep obliged faith unforfeited.
That ever holds. Who riseth from a feast
With that keen appetite that he sits down?
Where is the horse that doth untread again
His tedious measures with the unbated fire
That he did pace them first? All things that are,
Are with more spirit chased than enjoyed.
How like a younger or a prodigal
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
Hugged and embraced by the strumpet wind;
How like the prodigal doth she return
With overweathered ribs and ragged sails,
Lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind!
Here comes Lorenzo. More of this hereafter.
Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode.
Not I but my affairs have made you wait.
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,
Here dwells my father Jew.--Ho! Who's within?
Who are you? Tell me for more certainty,
Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue.
Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed,
For who love I so much? And now who knows
But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours?
Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.
Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains.
For I am much ashamed of my exchange.
But love is blind, and lovers cannot see
The pretty follies that themselves commit,
For if they could, Cupid himself would blush
To see me thus transformed to a boy.
Descend, for you must be my torchbearer.
What, must I hold a candle to my shames?
They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light.
Why, 'tis an office of discovery, love,
And I should be obscured.
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.
But come at once,
For the close night doth play the runaway,
And we are stayed for at Bassanio's feast.
With some more ducats, and be with you straight.
Now, by my hood, a gentle and no Jew!
Beshrew me but I love her heartily,
For she is wise, if I can judge of her,
And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,
And true she is, as she hath proved herself.
And therefore, like herself, wise, fair, and true,
Shall she be placed in my constant soul.
What, art thou come? On, gentleman, away!
Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.
Fie, fie, Gratiano, where are all the rest?
No masque tonight; the wind is come about;
Bassanio presently will go aboard.
Than to be under sail and gone tonight.
Go, draw aside the curtains and discover
The several caskets to this noble prince.
Now make your choice.
This first, of gold, who this inscription bears,
The second, silver, which this promise carries,
This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt,
How shall I know if I do choose the right?
The one of them contains my picture, prince.
If you choose that, then I am yours withal.
Some god direct my judgment! Let me see.
What says this leaden casket?
Must give--for what? For lead? Hazard for lead?
This casket threatens. Men that hazard all
Do it in hope of fair advantages.
What says the silver with her virgin hue?
As much as he deserves--pause there, Morocco,
And weigh thy value with an even hand.
If thou beest rated by thy estimation,
Thou dost deserve enough; and yet enough
May not extend so far as to the lady.
And yet to be afeard of my deserving
Were but a weak disabling of myself.
As much as I deserve--why, that's the lady!
In graces, and in qualities of breeding,
But more than these, in love I do deserve.
What if I strayed no farther, but chose here?
Let's see once more this saying graved in gold:
Why, that's the lady! All the world desires her.
From the four corners of the Earth they come
To kiss this shrine, this mortal, breathing saint.
The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds
Of wide Arabia are as throughfares now
For princes to come view fair Portia.
The watery kingdom, whose ambitious head
Spets in the face of heaven, is no bar
To stop the foreign spirits, but they come
As o'er a brook to see fair Portia.
One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
Is 't like that lead contains her? 'Twere damnation
To think so base a thought. It were too gross
To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave.
Or shall I think in silver she's immured,
Being ten times undervalued to tried gold?
Was set in worse than gold. They have in England
Stamped in gold, but that's insculped upon;
But here an angel in a golden bed
Lies all within.--Deliver me the key.
Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may.
There, take it, prince.  And if
Then I am yours.
There is a written scroll. I'll read the writing:
Cold indeed and labor lost!
Then, farewell, heat, and welcome, frost.
Portia, adieu. I have too grieved a heart
To take a tedious leave. Thus losers part.
Let all of his complexion choose me so.
Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail;
With him is Gratiano gone along;
And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.
The villain Jew with outcries raised the Duke,
Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship.
He came too late; the ship was under sail.
But there the Duke was given to understand
That in a gondola were seen together
Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica.
Besides, Antonio certified the Duke
They were not with Bassanio in his ship.
So strange, outrageous, and so variable
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets.
Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats!
Justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter,
Of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter,
And jewels--two stones, two rich and precious
Stol'n by my daughter! Justice! Find the girl!
She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats."
Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,
Crying "His stones, his daughter, and his ducats."
Let good Antonio look he keep his day,
Or he shall pay for this.
Who told me, in the Narrow Seas that part
The French and English, there miscarried
And wished in silence that it were not his.
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear--
Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.
Bassanio told him he would make some speed
Of his return. He answered "Do not so.
Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio,
But stay the very riping of the time;
And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me,
Let it not enter in your mind of love.
Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
To courtship and such fair ostents of love
As shall conveniently become you there."
And even there, his eye being big with tears,
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
And with affection wondrous sensible
He wrung Bassanio's hand--and so they parted.
And quicken his embraced heaviness
With some delight or other.
Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight.
The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath
And comes to his election presently.
Behold, there stand the caskets, noble prince.
If you choose that wherein I am contained,
Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized.
But if you fail, without more speech, my lord,
You must be gone from hence immediately.
First, never to unfold to anyone
Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail
Of the right casket, never in my life
To woo a maid in way of marriage;
Lastly, if I do fail in fortune of my choice,
Immediately to leave you, and be gone.
To these injunctions everyone doth swear
That comes to hazard for my worthless self.
And so have I addressed me. Fortune now
To my heart's hope! Gold, silver, and base lead.
You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
What says the golden chest? Ha, let me see:
What many men desire--that "many" may be
By the fool multitude that choose by show,
Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach,
Which pries not to th' interior, but like the martlet
Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
Even in the force and road of casualty.
Because I will not jump with common spirits
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
Why, then, to thee, thou silver treasure house.
Tell me once more what title thou dost bear.
And well said, too; for who shall go about
To cozen fortune and be honorable
Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume
To wear an undeserved dignity.
Were not derived corruptly, and that clear honor
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer!
How many then should cover that stand bare?
How many be commanded that command?
How much low peasantry would then be gleaned
From the true seed of honor? And how much honor
Picked from the chaff and ruin of the times,
To be new varnished? Well, but to my choice.
And instantly unlock my fortunes here.
Too long a pause for that which you find there.
What's here? The portrait of a blinking idiot
Presenting me a schedule! I will read it.--
How much unlike art thou to Portia!
How much unlike my hopes and my deservings.
Did I deserve no more than a fool's head?
Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?
To offend and judge are distinct offices
And of opposed natures.
Still more fool I shall appear
By the time I linger here.
With one fool's head I came to woo,
But I go away with two.
Sweet, adieu. I'll keep my oath,
Patiently to bear my wroth.	
Thus hath the candle singed the moth.
They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.
The ancient saying is no heresy:
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.
Where is my lady?
Madam, there is alighted at your gate
To signify th' approaching of his lord,
From whom he bringeth sensible regreets;
To wit ,
Gifts of rich value; yet I have not seen
So likely an ambassador of love.
To show how costly summer was at hand,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.
No more, I pray thee. I am half afeard
Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee,
Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him!
Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see
Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly.
Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!
Narrow Seas--the Goodwins, I think they call the
How now, Shylock, what news among the
Rhenish. But tell us, do you hear whether Antonio
Jew.
Hast thou found my daughter?
The curse never fell upon our nation till now, I
Tripolis.
Go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue. Go, good
Tubal, at our synagogue, Tubal.
Nerissa.]
Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong
There's something tells me 
Hate counsels not in such a quality.
But lest you should not understand me well
Before you venture for me. I could teach you
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn.
So will I never be. So may you miss me.
But if you do, you'll make me wish a sin,
That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
They have o'erlooked me and divided me.
One half of me is yours, the other half yours--
Mine own, I would say--but if mine, then yours,
And so all yours. O, these naughty times
Puts bars between the owners and their rights!
And so though yours, not yours. Prove it so,
Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I.
To eche it, and to draw it out in length,
To stay you from election.
For as I am, I live upon the rack.
Upon the rack, Bassanio? Then confess
What treason there is mingled with your love.
None but that ugly treason of mistrust,
Which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love.
There may as well be amity and life
Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack
Where men enforced do speak anything.
Promise me life and I'll confess the truth.
Well, then, confess and live.
Had been the very sum of my confession.
Doth teach me answers for deliverance!
But let me to my fortune and the caskets.
Away, then. I am locked in one of them.
If you do love me, you will find me out.--
Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof.
Let music sound while he doth make his choice.
Then if he lose he makes a swanlike end,
Fading in music. That the comparison
May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
And wat'ry deathbed for him. He may win,
And what is music then? Then music is
Even as the flourish when true subjects bow
To a new-crowned monarch. Such it is
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day
That creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes,
With no less presence but with much more love
Than young Alcides when he did redeem
The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy
To the sea-monster. I stand for sacrifice;
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives,
With bleared visages, come forth to view
The issue of th' exploit. Go, Hercules!
Live thou, I live. With much much more dismay
So may the outward shows be least themselves;
The world is still deceived with ornament.
In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt
But, being seasoned with a gracious voice,
Obscures the show of evil? In religion,
What damned error but some sober brow
Will bless it and approve it with a text,
Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?
There is no vice so simple but assumes
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts.
How many cowards whose hearts are all as false
As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars,
Who inward searched have livers white as milk,
And these assume but valor's excrement
To render them redoubted. Look on beauty,
And you shall see 'tis purchased by the weight,
Which therein works a miracle in nature,
Making them lightest that wear most of it.
So are those crisped snaky golden locks,
Which maketh such wanton gambols with the wind
Upon supposed fairness, often known
To be the dowry of a second head,
The skull that bred them in the sepulcher.
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
To a most dangerous sea, the beauteous scarf
Veiling an Indian beauty; in a word,
The seeming truth which cunning times put on
To entrap the wisest. Therefore, then, thou gaudy
Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee.
Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge
Which rather threaten'st than dost promise aught,
Thy paleness moves me more than eloquence,
And here choose I. Joy be the consequence!
How all the other passions fleet to air,
As doubtful thoughts and rash embraced despair,
And shudd'ring fear, and green-eyed jealousy!
In measure rain thy joy, scant this excess!
For fear I surfeit.
Fair Portia's counterfeit! What demigod
Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes?
Or whether, riding on the balls of mine,
Seem they in motion? Here are severed lips
Parted with sugar breath; so sweet a bar
Should sunder such sweet friends. Here in her hairs
The painter plays the spider, and hath woven
Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eyes!
How could he see to do them? Having made one,
Methinks it should have power to steal both his
And leave itself unfurnished. Yet look how far
The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow
In underprizing it, so far this shadow
Doth limp behind the substance. Here's the scroll,
The continent and summary of my fortune.
Like one of two contending in a prize
That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes,
Hearing applause and universal shout,
Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt
Whether those peals of praise be his or no,
So, thrice-fair lady, stand I even so,
As doubtful whether what I see be true,
Until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.
You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,
Such as I am. Though for myself alone
To wish myself much better, yet for you
More rich, that only to stand high in your account
Exceed account. But the full sum of me
Is sum of something, which, to term in gross,
Is an unlessoned girl, unschooled, unpracticed;
Happy in this, she is not yet so old
But she may learn; happier than this,
She is not bred so dull but she can learn;
Happiest of all, is that her gentle spirit
Commits itself to yours to be directed
As from her lord, her governor, her king.
Myself, and what is mine, to you and yours
Is now converted. But now I was the lord
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
Queen o'er myself; and even now, but now,
This house, these servants, and this same myself
Are yours, my lord's. I give them with this ring,
Which, when you part from, lose, or give away,
Let it presage the ruin of your love,
And be my vantage to exclaim on you.
Madam, you have bereft me of all words.
Only my blood speaks to you in my veins,
And there is such confusion in my powers
As after some oration fairly spoke
By a beloved prince there doth appear
Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
Where every something being blent together
Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy
Expressed and not expressed. But when this ring
Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence.
My lord and lady, it is now our time,
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper,
To cry "Good joy, good joy, my lord and lady!"
My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle lady,
For I am sure you can wish none from me.
And when your honors mean to solemnize
The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you
Even at that time I may be married too.
With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.
My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours:
You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid.
You loved, I loved; for intermission
No more pertains to me, my lord, than you.
Your fortune stood upon the caskets there,
And so did mine, too, as the matter falls.
For wooing here until I sweat again,
And swearing till my very roof was dry
With oaths of love, at last 
To have her love, provided that your fortune
Achieved her mistress.
Madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal.
And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?
Our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.
But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel?
What, and my old Venetian friend Salerio?
Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither--
If that the youth of my new int'rest here
Have power to bid you welcome.  By
Sweet Portia, welcome.
So do I, my lord. They are entirely welcome.
My purpose was not to have seen you here,
But meeting with Salerio by the way,
He did entreat me past all saying nay
To come with him along.
And I have reason for it.	
Signior Antonio
Commends him to you.
Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind,
Nor well, unless in mind. His letter there
Will show you his estate.
Nerissa, cheer yond stranger, bid her welcome.--
Your hand, Salerio. What's the news from Venice?
How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio?
We are the Jasons, we have won the Fleece.
There are some shrewd contents in yond same
That steals the color from Bassanio's cheek.
Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
Could turn so much the constitution
Of any constant man. What, worse and worse?--
With leave, Bassanio, I am half yourself,
And I must freely have the half of anything
That this same paper brings you.
Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words
That ever blotted paper. Gentle lady,
When I did first impart my love to you,
Ran in my veins: I was a gentleman.
And then I told you true; and yet, dear lady,
Rating myself at nothing, you shall see
How much I was a braggart. When I told you
My state was nothing, I should then have told you
That I was worse than nothing; for indeed
Engaged my friend to his mere enemy
To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady,
The paper as the body of my friend,
And every word in it a gaping wound
Issuing life blood.--But is it true, Salerio?
Hath all his ventures failed? What, not one hit?
From Tripolis, from Mexico and England,
From Lisbon, Barbary, and India,
And not one vessel 'scape the dreadful touch
Of merchant-marring rocks?
Besides, it should appear that if he had
The present money to discharge the Jew,
He would not take it. Never did I know
So keen and greedy to confound a man.
He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
And doth impeach the freedom of the state
If they deny him justice. Twenty merchants,
The Duke himself, and the magnificoes
Of greatest port have all persuaded with him,
But none can drive him from the envious plea
Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.
When I was with him, I have heard him swear
To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen,
That he would rather have Antonio's flesh
Than twenty times the value of the sum
That he did owe him. And I know, my lord,
If law, authority, and power deny not,
It will go hard with poor Antonio.
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?
The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
The best conditioned and unwearied spirit
In doing courtesies, and one in whom
The ancient Roman honor more appears
Than any that draws breath in Italy.
For me, three thousand ducats.
Pay him six thousand and deface the bond.
Double six thousand and then treble that,
Before a friend of this description
Shall lose a hair through Bassanio's fault.
First go with me to church and call me wife,
And then away to Venice to your friend!
For never shall you lie by Portia's side
With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
To pay the petty debt twenty times over.
When it is paid, bring your true friend along.
My maid Nerissa and myself meantime
Will live as maids and widows. Come, away,
For you shall hence upon your wedding day.
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer;
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
But let me hear the letter of your friend.
Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my
Since I have your good leave to go away,
No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay,
Nor rest be interposer 'twixt us twain.
Jailer, look to him. Tell not me of mercy.
This is the fool that lent out money gratis.
Jailer, look to him.
Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause,
But since I am a dog, beware my fangs.
The Duke shall grant me justice.--I do wonder,
Thou naughty jailer, that thou art so fond
To come abroad with him at his request.
To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield
To Christian intercessors. Follow not!
It is the most impenetrable cur
That ever kept with men.
He seeks my life. His reason well I know:
Many that have at times made moan to me.
Therefore he hates me.
Will never grant this forfeiture to hold.
The Duke cannot deny the course of law,
For the commodity that strangers have
With us in Venice, if it be denied,
Will much impeach the justice of the state,
Since that the trade and profit of the city
Consisteth of all nations. Therefore go.
These griefs and losses have so bated me
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
Tomorrow to my bloody creditor.--
Well, jailer, on.--Pray God Bassanio come
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.
Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
You have a noble and a true conceit
Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly
In bearing thus the absence of your lord.
But if you knew to whom you show this honor,
How true a gentleman you send relief,
How dear a lover of my lord your husband,
Than customary bounty can enforce you.
Nor shall not now; for in companions
That do converse and waste the time together,
Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love,
There must be needs a like proportion
Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit;
Which makes me think that this Antonio,
Being the bosom lover of my lord,
Must needs be like my lord. If it be so,
How little is the cost I have bestowed
In purchasing the semblance of my soul
From out the state of hellish cruelty!
This comes too near the praising of myself;
Therefore no more of it. Hear other things:
Lorenzo, I commit into your hands
The husbandry and manage of my house
Until my lord's return. For mine own part,
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Nerissa here,
Until her husband and my lord's return.
There is a monastery two miles off,
And there we will abide. I do desire you
Not to deny this imposition,
The which my love and some necessity
Now lays upon you.
My people do already know my mind
And will acknowledge you and Jessica
In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.
So fare you well till we shall meet again.
Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!
To wish it back on you. Fare you well, Jessica.
Now, Balthazar,
As I have ever found thee honest true,
So let me find thee still: take this same letter,
And use thou all th' endeavor of a man
In speed to Padua. See thou render this
Into my cousin's hands, Doctor Bellario.
And look what notes and garments he doth give
Bring them, I pray thee, with imagined speed
Unto the traject, to the common ferry
Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words,
But get thee gone. I shall be there before thee.
Madam, I go with all convenient speed.	
Come on, Nerissa, I have work in hand
That you yet know not of. We'll see our husbands
Before they think of us.
They shall, Nerissa, but in such a habit
That they shall think we are accomplished
With that we lack. I'll hold thee any wager,
When we are both accoutered like young men,
And wear my dagger with the braver grace,
And speak between the change of man and boy
With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps
Into a manly stride, and speak of frays
Like a fine bragging youth, and tell quaint lies
How honorable ladies sought my love,
Which I denying, they fell sick and died--
And wish, for all that, that I had not killed them.
And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell,
That men shall swear I have discontinued school
Above a twelvemonth. I have within my mind
Which I will practice.
If thou wert near a lewd interpreter!
But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device
When I am in my coach, which stays for us
At the park gate; and therefore haste away,
For we must measure twenty miles today.
Therefore be o' good cheer, for truly I think you
Here he comes.
Then bid them prepare dinner.
The fool hath planted in his memory
An army of good words, and I do know
Garnished like him, that for a tricksy word
Defy the matter. How cheer'st thou, Jessica?
And now, good sweet, say thy opinion
How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife?
Past all expressing. It is very meet
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life,
For having such a blessing in his lady
He finds the joys of heaven here on Earth,
And if on Earth he do not merit it,
In reason he should never come to heaven.
Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match,
And on the wager lay two earthly women,
And Portia one, there must be something else
Pawned with the other, for the poor rude world
Hath not her fellow.
Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.
Nay, but ask my opinion too of that!
Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach!
No, pray thee, let it serve for table talk.
Then howsome'er thou speak'st, 'mong other things
Salerio, and Gratiano, with Attendants.]
Uncapable of pity, void and empty
From any dram of mercy.
Your Grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify
His rigorous course; but since he stands obdurate,
And that no lawful means can carry me
Out of his envy's reach, I do oppose
My patience to his fury, and am armed
To suffer with a quietness of spirit
The very tyranny and rage of his.
Go, one, and call the Jew into the court.
He is ready at the door. He comes, my lord.
Make room, and let him stand before our face.--
Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,
That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice
To the last hour of act, and then, 'tis thought,
Thou 'lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;
And where thou now exacts the penalty,
Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh,
Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,
But, touched with humane gentleness and love,
Forgive a moi'ty of the principal,
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses
That have of late so huddled on his back,
Enow to press a royal merchant down
And pluck commiseration of his state
From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint,
From stubborn Turks, and Tartars never trained
To offices of tender courtesy.
We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your charter and your city's freedom!
You'll ask me why I rather choose to have
Three thousand ducats. I'll not answer that,
But say it is my humor. Is it answered?
What if my house be troubled with a rat,
And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats
To have it baned? What, are you answered yet?
Some men there are love not a gaping pig,
Some that are mad if they behold a cat,
And others, when the bagpipe sings i' th' nose,
Cannot contain their urine; for affection
Masters oft passion, sways it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes. Now for your answer:
As there is no firm reason to be rendered
Why he cannot abide a gaping pig,
Why he a harmless necessary cat,
Why he a woolen bagpipe, but of force
Must yield to such inevitable shame
As to offend, himself being offended,
So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
More than a lodged hate and a certain loathing
This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
To excuse the current of thy cruelty.
Do all men kill the things they do not love?
Hates any man the thing he would not kill?
Every offence is not a hate at first.
What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?
You may as well go stand upon the beach
And bid the main flood bate his usual height;
You may as well use question with the wolf
Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb;
You may as well forbid the mountain pines
To wag their high tops and to make no noise
When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven;
You may as well do anything most hard
As seek to soften that than which what's harder?--
His Jewish heart. Therefore I do beseech you
Make no more offers, use no farther means,
But with all brief and plain conveniency
Let me have judgment and the Jew his will.
For thy three thousand ducats here is six.
If every ducat in six thousand ducats
Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
How shalt thou hope for mercy, rend'ring none?
What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
You have among you many a purchased slave,
Which, like your asses and your dogs and mules,
You use in abject and in slavish parts
Because you bought them. Shall I say to you
Why sweat they under burdens? Let their beds
Be made as soft as yours, and let their palates
Be seasoned with such viands"? You will answer
The pound of flesh which I demand of him
Is dearly bought; 'tis mine and I will have it.
If you deny me, fie upon your law:
There is no force in the decrees of Venice.
Upon my power I may dismiss this court
Unless Bellario, a learned doctor
Whom I have sent for to determine this,
Come here today.
New come from Padua.
Bring us the letters. Call the messenger.
Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all
Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood!
Meetest for death. The weakest kind of fruit
Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me.
You cannot better be employed, Bassanio,
Than to live still and write mine epitaph.
Came you from Padua, from Bellario?
From both, my lord. Bellario greets your Grace.
Shylock sharpens his knife on the sole of his shoe.]
Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrout there.
Not on thy sole but on thy soul, harsh Jew,
Thou mak'st thy knife keen. But no metal can,
No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness
Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?
No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.
And for thy life let justice be accused;
Thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith,
To hold opinion with Pythagoras
That souls of animals infuse themselves
Into the trunks of men. Thy currish spirit
Governed a wolf who, hanged for human slaughter,
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
And whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam,
Infused itself in thee, for thy desires
Are wolfish, bloody, starved, and ravenous.
Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,
Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud.
Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
To cureless ruin. I stand here for law.
This letter from Bellario doth commend
Where is he?
To know your answer whether you'll admit him.
With all my heart.--Some three or four of you
Go give him courteous conduct to this place.
Meantime the court shall hear Bellario's letter.
Your Grace shall understand that, at the receipt of
You hear the learned Bellario what he writes.
And here I take it is the doctor come.--
Give me your hand. Come you from old Bellario?
Are you acquainted with the difference
That holds this present question in the court?
Which is the merchant here? And which the Jew?
Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.
Is your name Shylock?
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,
Yet in such rule that the Venetian law
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
Ay, so he says.
On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.
The quality of mercy is not strained.
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest:
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.
The throned monarch better than his crown.
His scepter shows the force of temporal power,
The attribute to awe and majesty
Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;
But mercy is above this sceptered sway.
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings;
It is an attribute to God Himself;
And earthly power doth then show likest God's
When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,
Though justice be thy plea, consider this:
That in the course of justice none of us
Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy,
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
To mitigate the justice of thy plea,
Which, if thou follow, this strict court of Venice
Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant
My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
The penalty and forfeit of my bond.
Is he not able to discharge the money?
Yes. Here I tender it for him in the court,
Yea, twice the sum. If that will not suffice,
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart.
If this will not suffice, it must appear
That malice bears down truth.  And I
Wrest once the law to your authority.
To do a great right, do a little wrong,
And curb this cruel devil of his will.
It must not be. There is no power in Venice
Can alter a decree established;
And many an error by the same example
Will rush into the state. It cannot be.
Here 'tis, most reverend doctor, here it is.
Shylock, there's thrice thy money offered thee.
An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven!
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
No, not for Venice!
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
Nearest the merchant's heart.--Be merciful;
Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond.
When it is paid according to the tenor.
It doth appear you are a worthy judge;
You know the law; your exposition
Hath been most sound. I charge you by the law,
Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar,
Proceed to judgment. By my soul I swear
There is no power in the tongue of man
To alter me. I stay here on my bond.
Most heartily I do beseech the court
To give the judgment.
You must prepare your bosom for his knife--
For the intent and purpose of the law
Hath full relation to the penalty,
Which here appeareth due upon the bond.
How much more elder art thou than thy looks!
Therefore lay bare your bosom--
So says the bond, doth it not, noble judge?
It is so.
Are there balance here to weigh the flesh?
Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,
To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.
Is it so nominated in the bond?
It is not so expressed, but what of that?
You, merchant, have you anything to say?
But little. I am armed and well prepared.--
Give me your hand, Bassanio. Fare you well.
Grieve not that I am fall'n to this for you,
For herein Fortune shows herself more kind
Than is her custom: it is still her use
To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow
An age of poverty, from which ling'ring penance
Of such misery doth she cut me off.
Commend me to your honorable wife,
Tell her the process of Antonio's end,
Say how I loved you, speak me fair in death,
And when the tale is told, bid her be judge
Whether Bassanio had not once a love.
Repent but you that you shall lose your friend
And he repents not that he pays your debt.
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
Antonio, I am married to a wife
Which is as dear to me as life itself,
But life itself, my wife, and all the world
Are not with me esteemed above thy life.
Here to this devil, to deliver you.
Your wife would give you little thanks for that
If she were by to hear you make the offer.
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.
The wish would make else an unquiet house.
These be the Christian husbands! I have a
Would any of the stock of Barabbas
Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!
We trifle time. I pray thee, pursue sentence.
The court awards it, and the law doth give it.
And you must cut this flesh from off his breast:
The law allows it, and the court awards it.
Most learned judge! A sentence!--Come, prepare.
Tarry a little. There is something else.
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood.
The words expressly are "a pound of flesh."
Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh,
But in the cutting it, if thou dost shed
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
Are by the laws of Venice confiscate
Unto the state of Venice.
Is that the law?
For, as thou urgest justice, be assured
Thou shalt have justice more than thou desir'st.
And let the Christian go.
Soft! The Jew shall have all justice. Soft, no haste!
He shall have nothing but the penalty.
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh.
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more
But just a pound of flesh. If thou tak'st more
Or less than a just pound, be it but so much
As makes it light or heavy in the substance
Or the division of the twentieth part
Of one poor scruple--nay, if the scale do turn
But in the estimation of a hair,
Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate.
Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.
Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.
Give me my principal and let me go.
He hath refused it in the open court.
He shall have merely justice and his bond.
Shall I not have barely my principal?
Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture
To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.
Why, then, the devil give him good of it!
The law hath yet another hold on you.
It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
If it be proved against an alien
That by direct or indirect attempts
He seek the life of any citizen,
The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive
Shall seize one half his goods; the other half
Comes to the privy coffer of the state,
And the offender's life lies in the mercy
Of the Duke only, 'gainst all other voice.
In which predicament I say thou stand'st,
For it appears by manifest proceeding
That indirectly, and directly too,
Thou hast contrived against the very life
Of the defendant, and thou hast incurred
The danger formerly by me rehearsed.
Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.
Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself!
And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
Thou hast not left the value of a cord;
Therefore thou must be hanged at the state's
That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit,
For half thy wealth, it is Antonio's;
The other half comes to the general state,
Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.
Ay, for the state, not for Antonio.
Nay, take my life and all. Pardon not that.
You take my house when you do take the prop
That doth sustain my house; you take my life
When you do take the means whereby I live.
What mercy can you render him, Antonio?
So please my lord the Duke and all the court
To quit the fine for one half of his goods,
The other half in use, to render it
Upon his death unto the gentleman
That lately stole his daughter.
Two things provided more: that for this favor
He presently become a Christian;
The other, that he do record a gift,
Here in the court, of all he dies possessed
Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.
He shall do this, or else I do recant
The pardon that I late pronounced here.
Art thou contented, Jew? What dost thou say?
And I will sign it.
In christ'ning shalt thou have two godfathers.
Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more,
To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.
Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.
And it is meet I presently set forth.
Antonio, gratify this gentleman,
For in my mind you are much bound to him.
Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof
Three thousand ducats due unto the Jew
We freely cope your courteous pains withal.
And stand indebted, over and above,
In love and service to you evermore.
He is well paid that is well satisfied,
And I, delivering you, am satisfied,
And therein do account myself well paid.
My mind was never yet more mercenary.
Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further.
Take some remembrance of us as a tribute,
Not as fee. Grant me two things, I pray you:
Not to deny me, and to pardon me.
You press me far, and therefore I will yield.
Give me your gloves; I'll wear them for your sake--
And for your love I'll take this ring from you.
Do not draw back your hand; I'll take no more,
And you in love shall not deny me this.
This ring, good sir? Alas, it is a trifle.
And now methinks I have a mind to it.
There's more depends on this than on the value.
The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,
And find it out by proclamation.
Only for this, I pray you pardon me.
You taught me first to beg, and now methinks
You teach me how a beggar should be answered.
Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife,
And when she put it on, she made me vow
That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it.
That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts.
And if your wife be not a madwoman,
And know how well I have deserved this ring,
She would not hold out enemy forever
For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you.
My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring.
Let his deservings and my love withal
Be valued 'gainst your wife's commandment.
Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him.
Give him the ring, and bring him if thou canst
Unto Antonio's house. Away, make haste.
Come, you and I will thither presently,
And in the morning early will we both
Fly toward Belmont.--Come, Antonio.
Inquire the Jew's house out; give him this deed
And let him sign it.  We'll
And be a day before our husbands home.
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.
Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en.
My Lord Bassanio, upon more advice,
Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat
Your company at dinner.	
His ring I do accept most thankfully,
And so I pray you tell him. Furthermore,
That will I do.
Which I did make him swear to keep forever.
Thou mayst, I warrant! We shall have old swearing
That they did give the rings away to men;
But we'll outface them, and outswear them, too.--
Away, make haste! Thou know'st where I will tarry.
Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?
The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees
And they did make no noise, in such a night
Troilus, methinks, mounted the Trojan walls
And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents
Where Cressid lay that night.
Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew
And saw the lion's shadow ere himself
And ran dismayed away.
Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love
To come again to Carthage.
Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
That did renew old Aeson.
Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
And with an unthrift love did run from Venice
As far as Belmont.
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
And ne'er a true one.
Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,
Slander her love, and he forgave it her.
But hark, I hear the footing of a man.
Who comes so fast in silence of the night?
Stephano is my name, and I bring word
My mistress will before the break of day
Be here at Belmont. She doth stray about
By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays
For happy wedlock hours.
None but a holy hermit and her maid.
He is not, nor we have not heard from him.--
But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica,
And ceremoniously let us prepare
Some welcome for the mistress of the house.
Lorenzo, sola, sola!
Let's in, and there expect their coming.
And yet no matter; why should we go in?--
My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you,
Within the house, your mistress is at hand,
And bring your music forth into the air.
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank.
Here will we sit and let the sounds of music
Creep in our ears; soft stillness and the night
Become the touches of sweet harmony.
Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold.
There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st
But in his motion like an angel sings,
Still choiring to the young-eyed cherubins.
Such harmony is in immortal souls,
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.
Come, ho! and wake Diana with a hymn.
With sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear,
And draw her home with music.
The reason is, your spirits are attentive.
For do but note a wild and wanton herd
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
Which is the hot condition of their blood,
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
Or any air of music touch their ears,
You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
Their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze
By the sweet power of music. Therefore the poet
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and
Since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
But music for the time doth change his nature.
The man that hath no music in himself,
Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils;
The motions of his spirit are dull as night,
And his affections dark as Erebus.
Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music.
That light we see is burning in my hall.
How far that little candle throws his beams!
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.
When the moon shone we did not see the candle.
So doth the greater glory dim the less.
Until a king be by, and then his state
Empties itself as doth an inland brook
Into the main of waters. Music, hark!
It is your music, madam, of the house.
Nothing is good, I see, without respect.
Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.
Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.
The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark
When neither is attended, and I think
The nightingale, if she should sing by day
When every goose is cackling, would be thought
No better a musician than the wren.
How many things by season seasoned are
To their right praise and true perfection!
Peace--how the moon sleeps with Endymion
And would not be awaked!
Or I am much deceived, of Portia.
He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo,
By the bad voice.
We have been praying for our husbands' welfare,
Which speed we hope the better for our words.
Are they returned?
But there is come a messenger before
To signify their coming.
Give order to my servants that they take
No note at all of our being absent hence--
Nor you, Lorenzo--Jessica, nor you.
Your husband is at hand. I hear his trumpet.
We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.
This night methinks is but the daylight sick;
It looks a little paler. 'Tis a day
Such as the day is when the sun is hid.
We should hold day with the Antipodes
If you would walk in absence of the sun.
Let me give light, but let me not be light,
For a light wife doth make a heavy husband,
And never be Bassanio so for me.
But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.
This is the man, this is Antonio,
To whom I am so infinitely bound.
You should in all sense be much bound to him,
For as I hear he was much bound for you.
No more than I am well acquitted of.
Sir, you are very welcome to our house.
It must appear in other ways than words;
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.
By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong!
In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk.
Would he were gelt that had it, for my part,
Since you do take it, love, so much at heart.
About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring
That she did give me, whose posy was
For all the world like cutler's poetry
Upon a knife, "Love me, and leave me not."
What talk you of the posy or the value?
You swore to me when I did give it you
That you would wear it till your hour of death,
And that it should lie with you in your grave.
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
You should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a judge's clerk! No, God's my judge,
The clerk will ne'er wear hair on 's face that had it.
He will, an if he live to be a man.
Ay, if a woman live to be a man.
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth,
No higher than thyself, the judge's clerk,
You were to blame, I must be plain with you,
To part so slightly with your wife's first gift,
And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
Never to part with it, and here he stands.
Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth
That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano,
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief.
An 'twere to me I should be mad at it.
Why, I were best to cut my left hand off
And swear I lost the ring defending it.
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
Unto the judge that begged it, and indeed
Deserved it, too. And then the boy, his clerk,
That took some pains in writing, he begged mine,
And neither man nor master would take aught
But the two rings.
Not that, I hope, which you received of me.
If I could add a lie unto a fault,
Hath not the ring upon it. It is gone.
Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bed
Until I see the ring!
Till I again see mine!
If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
If you did know for whom I gave the ring,
And would conceive for what I gave the ring,
And how unwillingly I left the ring,
When naught would be accepted but the ring,
You would abate the strength of your displeasure.
If you had known the virtue of the ring,
Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
Or your own honor to contain the ring,
You would not then have parted with the ring.
What man is there so much unreasonable,
If you had pleased to have defended it
With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
Nerissa teaches me what to believe:
No, by my honor, madam, by my soul,
No woman had it, but a civil doctor,
Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me
And begged the ring, the which I did deny him
And suffered him to go displeased away,
Even he that had held up the very life
Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady?
My honor would not let ingratitude
So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady,
For by these blessed candles of the night,
Had you been there, I think you would have begged
The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.
Let not that doctor e'er come near my house!
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
And that which you did swear to keep for me,
No, not my body, nor my husband's bed.
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.
Lie not a night from home. Watch me like Argus.
If you do not, if I be left alone,
Now by mine honor, which is yet mine own,
And I his clerk. Therefore be well advised
How you do leave me to mine own protection.
Well, do you so. Let not me take him, then,
For if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen.
Sir, grieve not you. You are welcome
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
And in the hearing of these many friends
Wherein I see myself--
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself,
In each eye one. Swear by your double self,
And there's an oath of credit.
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
Which but for him that had your husband's ring
Had quite miscarried. I dare be bound again,
My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
Will never more break faith advisedly.
Then you shall be his surety. Give him this,
And bid him keep it better than the other.
Here, Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!
For by this ring, the doctor lay with me.
And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano,
For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk,
In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.
Why, this is like the mending of highways
In summer, where the ways are fair enough!
What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it?
Speak not so grossly.--You are all amazed.
Here is a letter; read it at your leisure.
It comes from Padua from Bellario.
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
Nerissa there, her clerk. Lorenzo here
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
And even but now returned. I have not yet
Entered my house.--Antonio, you are welcome,
And I have better news in store for you
Than you expect. Unseal this letter soon.
There you shall find three of your argosies
Are richly come to harbor suddenly.
You shall not know by what strange accident
Were you the doctor and I knew you not?
Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
Unless he live until he be a man.
Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow.
When I am absent, then lie with my wife.
Sweet lady, you have given me life and living;
For here I read for certain that my ships
Are safely come to road.
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.
Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.
There do I give to you and Jessica,
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
After his death, of all he dies possessed of.
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way
Of starved people.
And yet I am sure you are not satisfied
Of these events at full. Let us go in,
And charge us there upon inter'gatories,
And we will answer all things faithfully.
Let it be so. The first inter'gatory
That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is
Whether till the next night she had rather stay
Or go to bed now, being two hours to day.
But were the day come, I should wish it dark
Till I were couching with the doctor's clerk.
Well, while I live, I'll fear no other thing
So sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring.
Cordelia, and Attendants.]
Attend the lords of France and Burgundy,
Gloucester.
Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.--
Give me the map there.	
Know that we have divided
In three our kingdom, and 'tis our fast intent
To shake all cares and business from our age,
Conferring them on younger strengths, while we
Unburdened crawl toward death. Our son of
Cornwall
And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
We have this hour a constant will to publish
Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife
May be prevented now.
The two great princes, France and Burgundy,
Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn
And here are to be answered. Tell me, my
Since now we will divest us both of rule,
Interest of territory, cares of state--
Which of you shall we say doth love us most,
That we our largest bounty may extend
Where nature doth with merit challenge. Goneril,
Our eldest born, speak first.
Sir, I love you more than word can wield the
Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty,
Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare,
No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honor;
As much as child e'er loved, or father found;
Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.
Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
With shadowy forests and with champains riched,
With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
We make thee lady. To thine and Albany's issue
Be this perpetual.--What says our second
Our dearest Regan, wife of Cornwall? Speak.
And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
Only she comes too short, that I profess
Myself an enemy to all other joys
Which the most precious square of sense
And find I am alone felicitate
In your dear Highness' love.
And yet not so, since I am sure my love's
More ponderous than my tongue.
To thee and thine hereditary ever
Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,
No less in space, validity, and pleasure
Than that conferred on Goneril.--Now, our joy,
Although our last and least, to whose young love
The vines of France and milk of Burgundy
Strive to be interessed, what can you say to draw
Nothing will come of nothing. Speak again.
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
My heart into my mouth. I love your Majesty
According to my bond, no more nor less.
How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,
Lest you may mar your fortunes.
You have begot me, bred me, loved me.
Obey you, love you, and most honor you.
Why have my sisters husbands if they say
They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,
That lord whose hand must take my plight shall
Half my love with him, half my care and duty.
Sure I shall never marry like my sisters,
To love my father all.
Let it be so. Thy truth, then, be thy dower,
For by the sacred radiance of the sun,
The mysteries of Hecate and the night,
By all the operation of the orbs
From whom we do exist and cease to be,
Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
Propinquity, and property of blood,
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Hold thee from this forever. The barbarous
Scythian,
Or he that makes his generation messes
To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
Be as well neighbored, pitied, and relieved
As thou my sometime daughter.
Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
On her kind nursery.  Hence and avoid
So be my grave my peace as here I give
Her father's heart from her.--Call France. Who stirs?
Call Burgundy.  Cornwall and
Albany,
With my two daughters' dowers digest the third.
Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
Preeminence, and all the large effects
That troop with majesty. Ourself by monthly course,
With reservation of an hundred knights
By you to be sustained, shall our abode
Make with you by due turn. Only we shall retain
The name and all th' addition to a king.
The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,
Beloved sons, be yours, which to confirm,
This coronet part between you.
Whom I have ever honored as my king,
Loved as my father, as my master followed,
As my great patron thought on in my prayers--
The bow is bent and drawn. Make from the shaft.
Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
The region of my heart. Be Kent unmannerly
When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?
Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak
When power to flattery bows? To plainness honor's
When majesty falls to folly. Reserve thy state,
And in thy best consideration check
This hideous rashness. Answer my life my
Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sounds
Reverb no hollowness.
My life I never held but as a pawn
To wage against thine enemies, nor fear to lose
Thy safety being motive.
See better, Lear, and let me still remain
The true blank of thine eye.
Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.
Kill thy physician, and thy fee bestow
Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,
Or whilst I can vent clamor from my throat,
Hear me, recreant; on thine allegiance, hear me!
That thou hast sought to make us break our vows--
Which we durst never yet--and with strained pride
To come betwixt our sentence and our power,
Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
Our potency made good, take thy reward:
Five days we do allot thee for provision
To shield thee from disasters of the world,
And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
Upon our kingdom. If on the tenth day following
Thy banished trunk be found in our dominions,
The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter,
This shall not be revoked.
Fare thee well, king. Sith thus thou wilt appear,
Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
That justly think'st and hast most rightly said.
That good effects may spring from words of love.--
Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu.
He'll shape his old course in a country new.
Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
We first address toward you, who with this king
Hath rivaled for our daughter. What in the least
Will you require in present dower with her,
Or cease your quest of love?
Nor will you tender less.
When she was dear to us, we did hold her so,
But now her price is fallen. Sir, there she stands.
If aught within that little seeming substance,
Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced
And nothing more, may fitly like your Grace,
She's there, and she is yours.
Will you, with those infirmities she owes,
Unfriended, new-adopted to our hate,
Dowered with our curse and strangered with our
Take her or leave her?
Election makes not up in such conditions.
Then leave her, sir, for by the power that made me
To match you where I hate. Therefore beseech you
Than on a wretch whom Nature is ashamed
Almost t' acknowledge hers.
That she whom even but now was your best
The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
The best, the dearest, should in this trice of time
Commit a thing so monstrous to dismantle
So many folds of favor. Sure her offense
Must be of such unnatural degree
That monsters it, or your forevouched affection
Fall into taint; which to believe of her
Must be a faith that reason without miracle
Should never plant in me.
If for I want that glib and oily art
To speak and purpose not, since what I well
It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,
No unchaste action or dishonored step
That hath deprived me of your grace and favor,
But even for want of that for which I am richer:
That I am glad I have not, though not to have it
Hath lost me in your liking.
Hadst not been born than not t' have pleased me
Is it but this--a tardiness in nature
Which often leaves the history unspoke
That it intends to do?--My lord of Burgundy,
What say you to the lady? Love's not love
When it is mingled with regards that stands
Aloof from th' entire point. Will you have her?
She is herself a dowry.
Give but that portion which yourself proposed,
And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
Duchess of Burgundy.
Nothing. I have sworn. I am firm.
That you must lose a husband.
Burgundy.
Since that respect and fortunes are his love,
Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich being poor;
Most choice, forsaken; and most loved, despised,
Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon,
Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.
Gods, gods! 'Tis strange that from their cold'st
My love should kindle to enflamed respect.--
Thy dowerless daughter, king, thrown to my
Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France.
Not all the dukes of wat'rish Burgundy
Can buy this unprized precious maid of me.--
Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind.
Thou losest here a better where to find.
Thou hast her, France. Let her be thine, for we
Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
That face of hers again.  Therefore
Without our grace, our love, our benison.--
Come, noble Burgundy.
Goneril, and Regan exit.]
The jewels of our father, with washed eyes
Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are,
And like a sister am most loath to call
Your faults as they are named. Love well our
To your professed bosoms I commit him;
But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
So farewell to you both.
Prescribe not us our duty.
Be to content your lord, who hath received you
At Fortune's alms. You have obedience scanted
And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides,
Who covers faults at last with shame derides.
Well may you prosper.
Thou, Nature, art my goddess. To thy law
My services are bound. Wherefore should I
Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
The curiosity of nations to deprive me
For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
Lag of a brother? why "bastard"? Wherefore "base,"
When my dimensions are as well compact,
My mind as generous and my shape as true
As honest madam's issue? Why brand they us
With "base," with "baseness," "bastardy," "base,"
Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
More composition and fierce quality
Than doth within a dull, stale, tired bed
Go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops
Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well then,
Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land.
Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
As to th' legitimate. Fine word, "legitimate."
Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed
And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
Shall top th' legitimate. I grow, I prosper.
Now, gods, stand up for bastards!
Kent banished thus? And France in choler parted?
And the King gone tonight, prescribed his power,
Confined to exhibition? All this done
Upon the gad?--Edmund, how now? What news?
Hum? Conspiracy? "Sleep till I wake him, you
Where is he?
Pray you go. There's my key. If you do stir abroad,
Whose nature is so far from doing harms
That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
My practices ride easy. I see the business.
Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit.
All with me's meet that I can fashion fit.
By day and night he wrongs me. Every hour
He flashes into one gross crime or other
That sets us all at odds. I'll not endure it.
His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
If you come slack of former services,
You shall do well. The fault of it I'll answer.
Put on what weary negligence you please,
You and your fellows. I'd have it come to question.
If he distaste it, let him to my sister,
Whose mind and mine I know in that are one,
Not to be overruled. Idle old man
That still would manage those authorities
That he hath given away. Now, by my life,
Old fools are babes again and must be used
With checks as flatteries, when they are seen
Remember what I have said.
And let his knights have colder looks among you.
What grows of it, no matter. Advise your fellows so.
That I may speak. I'll write straight to my sister
To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.
If but as well I other accents borrow
That can my speech diffuse, my good intent
May carry through itself to that full issue
For which I razed my likeness. Now, banished Kent,
If thou canst serve where thou dost stand
So may it come thy master, whom thou lov'st,
Shall find thee full of labors.
How now, what art thou?
King.
Fool? Go you and call my Fool hither.
You, you, sirrah, where's my daughter?
How now? Where's that mongrel?
There's a great abatement of kindness appears as
Attendant exits.] Go you call hither my Fool.
You gave me nothing for 't.--Can you make no use
And ladies too, they will not let me have all the fool
Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach
They'll have me whipped for speaking true, thou 'lt
How now, daughter? What makes that frontlet on?
Methinks you are too much of late i' th' frown.
That's a shelled peascod.
Not only, sir, this your all-licensed Fool,
But other of your insolent retinue
Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth
In rank and not-to-be-endured riots. Sir,
To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful,
By what yourself too late have spoke and done,
That you protect this course and put it on
By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
Would not 'scape censure, nor the redresses sleep
Which in the tender of a wholesome weal
Might in their working do you that offense,
Which else were shame, that then necessity
Will call discreet proceeding.
So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away
These dispositions which of late transport you
From what you rightly are.
Does any here know me? This is not Lear.
Does Lear walk thus, speak thus? Where are his
Either his notion weakens, his discernings
Are lethargied--Ha! Waking? 'Tis not so.
Who is it that can tell me who I am?
Knowledge, and reason, I should be false persuaded
This admiration, sir, is much o' th' savor
Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
To understand my purposes aright.
As you are old and reverend, should be wise.
Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires,
Men so disordered, so debauched and bold,
That this our court, infected with their manners,
Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust
Makes it more like a tavern or a brothel
Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak
For instant remedy. Be then desired,
By her that else will take the thing she begs,
And the remainders that shall still depend
To be such men as may besort your age,
Which know themselves and you.
Saddle my horses. Call my train together.
Degenerate bastard, I'll not trouble thee.
Yet have I left a daughter.
You strike my people, and your disordered rabble
Make servants of their betters.
Woe that too late repents!--O, sir, are you
Is it your will? Speak, sir.--Prepare my horses.
Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,
More hideous when thou show'st thee in a child
Than the sea monster!
My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
That all particulars of duty know
And in the most exact regard support
The worships of their name. O most small fault,
How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show,
Which, like an engine, wrenched my frame of
From the fixed place, drew from my heart all love
And added to the gall! O Lear, Lear, Lear!
Beat at this gate that let thy folly in
And thy dear judgment out. Go, go, my people.
My lord, I am guiltless as I am ignorant
Of what hath moved you.
Hear, Nature, hear, dear goddess, hear!
Suspend thy purpose if thou didst intend
To make this creature fruitful.
Into her womb convey sterility.
Dry up in her the organs of increase,
And from her derogate body never spring
Create her child of spleen, that it may live
And be a thwart disnatured torment to her.
Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth,
With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,
Turn all her mother's pains and benefits
To laughter and contempt, that she may feel
How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
To have a thankless child.--Away, away!
Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
Never afflict yourself to know more of it,
But let his disposition have that scope
As dotage gives it.
What, fifty of my followers at a clap?
Within a fortnight?
That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus,
That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon
Th' untented woundings of a father's curse
Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,
Beweep this cause again, I'll pluck you out
And cast you, with the waters that you loose,
To temper clay. Yea, is 't come to this?
Ha! Let it be so. I have another daughter
Who, I am sure, is kind and comfortable.
When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
She'll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find
That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think
To the great love I bear you--
You, sir, more knave than Fool, after your master.
This man hath had good counsel. A hundred
At point a hundred knights! Yes, that on every
Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
He may enguard his dotage with their powers
And hold our lives in mercy.--Oswald, I say!
Let me still take away the harms I fear,
Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart.
What he hath uttered I have writ my sister.
If she sustain him and his hundred knights
When I have showed th' unfitness--
How now, Oswald?
What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
Take you some company and away to horse.
Inform her full of my particular fear,
And thereto add such reasons of your own
As may compact it more. Get you gone,
And hasten your return.  No, no, my
This milky gentleness and course of yours,
Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon,
You are much more at task for want of wisdom
Than praised for harmful mildness.
How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell.
Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
Thou canst tell why one's nose stands i' th' middle
Keep me in temper. I would not be mad!
How now, are the horses ready?
She that's a maid now and laughs at my departure,
Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut
Regan his duchess will be here with him this night.
The Duke be here tonight? The better, best.
This weaves itself perforce into my business.
My father hath set guard to take my brother,
And I have one thing of a queasy question
Which I must act. Briefness and fortune work!--
Brother, a word. Descend. Brother, I say!
My father watches. O sir, fly this place!
Intelligence is given where you are hid.
You have now the good advantage of the night.
Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
He's coming hither, now, i' th' night, i' th' haste,
And Regan with him. Have you nothing said
Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany?
Advise yourself.
In cunning I must draw my sword upon you.
Draw. Seem to defend yourself. Now, quit you
Yield! Come before my father! Light, hoa, here!
Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
Of my more fierce endeavor. I have seen drunkards
Do more than this in sport.	
Father, father!
Stop, stop! No help?
Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
To stand auspicious mistress.
Look, sir, I bleed.
Edmund?
Fled this way, sir, when by no means he could--
Pursue him, ho! Go after.  By no
Persuade me to the murder of your Lordship,
But that I told him the revenging gods
Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond
The child was bound to th' father--sir, in fine,
Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
With his prepared sword he charges home
My unprovided body, lanced mine arm;
And when he saw my best alarumed spirits,
Bold in the quarrel's right, roused to th' encounter,
Or whether ghasted by the noise I made,
Full suddenly he fled.
Not in this land shall he remain uncaught,
And found--dispatch. The noble duke my master,
My worthy arch and patron, comes tonight.
By his authority I will proclaim it
That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,
Bringing the murderous coward to the stake;
He that conceals him, death.
When I dissuaded him from his intent
And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
Make thy words faithed? No. What I should
As this I would, though thou didst produce
My very character--I'd turn it all
To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practice.
And thou must make a dullard of the world
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potential spurs
To make thee seek it."
Would he deny his letter, said he?
Hark, the Duke's trumpets. I know not why he
All ports I'll bar. The villain shall not 'scape.
The Duke must grant me that. Besides, his picture
May have due note of him. And of my land,
Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means
To make thee capable.
How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither,
Which I can call but now, I have heard strange
If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
Which can pursue th' offender. How dost, my
What, did my father's godson seek your life?
He whom my father named, your Edgar?
Was he not companion with the riotous knights
That tended upon my father?
Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
No marvel, then, though he were ill affected.
To have th' expense and waste of his revenues.
Been well informed of them, and with such cautions
That if they come to sojourn at my house
Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
He did bewray his practice, and received
This hurt you see striving to apprehend him.
If he be taken, he shall never more
Be feared of doing harm. Make your own purpose,
How in my strength you please.--For you, Edmund,
Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
So much commend itself, you shall be ours.
Natures of such deep trust we shall much need.
You we first seize on.
Truly, however else.
You know not why we came to visit you--
Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night.
Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
Wherein we must have use of your advice.
Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
Of differences, which I best thought it fit
To answer from our home. The several messengers
From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
Lay comforts to your bosom and bestow
Your needful counsel to our businesses,
Which craves the instant use.
Your Graces are right welcome.
Draw!
Cornwall, Regan, Gloucester, Servants.]
Weapons? Arms? What's the matter here?
The messengers from our sister and the King.
You cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a
You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.
That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as
Like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain
Which are too intrinse t' unloose; smooth every
That in the natures of their lords rebel--
Being oil to fire, snow to the colder moods--
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
With every gale and vary of their masters,
Knowing naught, like dogs, but following.--
Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,
No contraries hold more antipathy
Than I and such a knave.
Why dost thou call him "knave"? What is his fault?
No more, perchance, does mine, nor his, nor hers.
Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain:
Than stands on any shoulder that I see
Before me at this instant.
Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect
Quite from his nature. He cannot flatter, he.
An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!
An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.
These kind of knaves I know, which in this
Harbor more craft and more corrupter ends
Than twenty silly-ducking observants
That stretch their duties nicely.
Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
Under th' allowance of your great aspect,
Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
On flick'ring Phoebus' front--
It pleased the King his master very late
To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
When he, compact, and flattering his displeasure,
Tripped me behind; being down, insulted, railed,
And put upon him such a deal of man
That worthied him, got praises of the King
For him attempting who was self-subdued;
And in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
Drew on me here again.
But Ajax is their fool.
You stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,
We'll teach you.
Call not your stocks for me. I serve the King,
On whose employment I was sent to you.
You shall do small respect, show too bold
Against the grace and person of my master,
Stocking his messenger.
Fetch forth the stocks.--As I have life and honor,
There shall he sit till noon.
Till noon? Till night, my lord, and all night, too.
Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,
You should not use me so.
This is a fellow of the selfsame color
Our sister speaks of.--Come, bring away the stocks.
Let me beseech your Grace not to do so.
His fault is much, and the good king his master
Will check him for 't. Your purposed low correction
Is such as basest and contemned'st wretches
For pilf'rings and most common trespasses
Are punished with. The King must take it ill
That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,
Should have him thus restrained.
My sister may receive it much more worse
To have her gentleman abused, assaulted
For following her affairs.--Put in his legs.
Whose disposition all the world well knows
Will not be rubbed nor stopped. I'll entreat for thee.
Pray, do not, sir. I have watched and traveled hard.
Some time I shall sleep out; the rest I'll whistle.
Give you good morrow.
The Duke's to blame in this. 'Twill be ill taken.
Good king, that must approve the common saw,
Thou out of heaven's benediction com'st
To the warm sun.	
Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
That by thy comfortable beams I may
Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles
But misery. I know 'tis from Cordelia,
Who hath most fortunately been informed
Of my obscured course, and shall find time
From this enormous state, seeking to give
Losses their remedies. All weary and o'erwatched,
Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
This shameful lodging.
Fortune, good night. Smile once more; turn thy
And by the happy hollow of a tree
Escaped the hunt. No port is free; no place
That guard and most unusual vigilance
Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may 'scape,
To take the basest and most poorest shape
That ever penury in contempt of man
Brought near to beast. My face I'll grime with filth,
Blanket my loins, elf all my hairs in knots,
And with presented nakedness outface
The winds and persecutions of the sky.
The country gives me proof and precedent
Of Bedlam beggars who with roaring voices
Strike in their numbed and mortified arms
Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary,
And, with this horrible object, from low farms,
Poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills,
Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
Enforce their charity. "Poor Turlygod! Poor Tom!"
That's something yet. "Edgar" I nothing am.
And not send back my messenger.
The night before there was no purpose in them
Of this remove.
Mak'st thou this shame thy pastime?
What's he that hath so much thy place mistook
To set thee here?
Your son and daughter.
They could not, would not do 't. 'Tis worse than
To do upon respect such violent outrage.
Resolve me with all modest haste which way
Thou might'st deserve or they impose this usage,
Coming from us.
Ere I was risen from the place that showed
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
Stewed in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
From Goneril his mistress salutations;
Delivered letters, spite of intermission,
Which presently they read; on whose contents
They summoned up their meiny, straight took
Commanded me to follow and attend
The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks;
And meeting here the other messenger,
Whose welcome, I perceived, had poisoned mine,
Being the very fellow which of late
Displayed so saucily against your Highness,
Having more man than wit about me, drew.
He raised the house with loud and coward cries.
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
The shame which here it suffers.
But, for all this, thou shalt have as many dolors for
Hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow!
Thy element's below.--Where is this daughter?
Made you no more offense but what you speak of?
How chance the King comes with so small a number?
Deny to speak with me? They are sick? They are
They have traveled all the night? Mere fetches,
The images of revolt and flying off.
Fetch me a better answer.
You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
How unremovable and fixed he is
In his own course.
Vengeance, plague, death, confusion!
Gloucester,
Well, my good lord, I have informed them so.
The King would speak with Cornwall. The dear
Would with his daughter speak, commands, tends
Are they "informed" of this? My breath and
No, but not yet. Maybe he is not well.
Infirmity doth still neglect all office
Whereto our health is bound. We are not ourselves
When nature, being oppressed, commands the mind
To suffer with the body. I'll forbear,
And am fallen out with my more headier will,
To take the indisposed and sickly fit
For the sound man.  Death on
Should he sit here? This act persuades me
That this remotion of the Duke and her
Is practice only. Give me my servant forth.
Go tell the Duke and 's wife I'd speak with them.
Now, presently, bid them come forth and hear me,
Or at their chamber door I'll beat the drum
Till it cry sleep to death.
Regan, I think you are. I know what reason
Sepulch'ring an adult'ress.  O, are you
Some other time for that.--Beloved Regan,
Thy sister's naught. O Regan, she hath tied
Sharp-toothed unkindness, like a vulture, here.
With how depraved a quality--O Regan!
You less know how to value her desert
Than she to scant her duty.
Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance
She have restrained the riots of your followers,
As clears her from all blame.
Nature in you stands on the very verge
Of his confine. You should be ruled and led
By some discretion that discerns your state
Better than you yourself. Therefore, I pray you
That to our sister you do make return.
Say you have wronged her.
Do you but mark how this becomes the house:
Age is unnecessary. On my knees I beg
That you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food."
Good sir, no more. These are unsightly tricks.
Return you to my sister.
She hath abated me of half my train,
Looked black upon me, struck me with her tongue
Most serpentlike upon the very heart.
All the stored vengeances of heaven fall
On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,
You taking airs, with lameness!
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty,
You fen-sucked fogs drawn by the powerful sun
To fall and blister!
When the rash mood is on.
No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse.
Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give
Thee o'er to harshness. Her eyes are fierce, but
Do comfort and not burn. 'Tis not in thee
To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
And, in conclusion, to oppose the bolt
Against my coming in. Thou better know'st
The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude.
Thy half o' th' kingdom hast thou not forgot,
Wherein I thee endowed.
Who put my man i' th' stocks?
That she would soon be here.
Is your lady come?
This is a slave whose easy-borrowed pride
Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.--
Out, varlet, from my sight!
Who stocked my servant? Regan, I have good hope
Thou didst not know on 't.
Who comes here? O heavens,
If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
Allow obedience, if you yourselves are old,
Make it your cause. Send down and take my part.
Why not by th' hand, sir? How have I offended?
All's not offense that indiscretion finds
And dotage terms so.
Will you yet hold?--How came my man i' th'
Deserved much less advancement.
If till the expiration of your month
You will return and sojourn with my sister,
Dismissing half your train, come then to me.
Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
Return to her? And fifty men dismissed?
No! Rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
To wage against the enmity o' th' air,
To be a comrade with the wolf and owl,
Necessity's sharp pinch. Return with her?
Why the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took
Our youngest born--I could as well be brought
To knee his throne and, squire-like, pension beg
To keep base life afoot. Return with her?
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
To this detested groom.	
We'll no more meet, no more see one another.
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter,
Or, rather, a disease that's in my flesh,
Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a boil,
In my corrupted blood. But I'll not chide thee.
Let shame come when it will; I do not call it.
Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove.
Mend when thou canst. Be better at thy leisure.
For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister,
For those that mingle reason with your passion
Must be content to think you old, and so--
But she knows what she does.
Is it not well? What should you need of more?
Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger
Speak 'gainst so great a number? How in one house
Should many people under two commands
Hold amity? 'Tis hard, almost impossible.
Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
From those that she calls servants, or from mine?
Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack
We could control them. If you will come to me
To bring but five-and-twenty. To no more
Will I give place or notice.
Made you my guardians, my depositaries,
But kept a reservation to be followed
With such a number. What, must I come to you
With five-and-twenty? Regan, said you so?
And speak 't again, my lord. No more with me.
Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favored
When others are more wicked. Not being the worst
Stands in some rank of praise.  I'll go
Thy fifty yet doth double five-and-twenty,
And thou art twice her love.
What need you five-and-twenty, ten, or five,
To follow in a house where twice so many
Have a command to tend you?
Are in the poorest thing superfluous.
Allow not nature more than nature needs,
Man's life is cheap as beast's. Thou art a lady;
If only to go warm were gorgeous,
Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st,
Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true
You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!
You see me here, you gods, a poor old man
As full of grief as age, wretched in both.
If it be you that stirs these daughters' hearts
Against their father, fool me not so much
To bear it tamely. Touch me with noble anger,
And let not women's weapons, water drops,
Stain my man's cheeks.--No, you unnatural hags,
That all the world shall--I will do such things--
What they are yet I know not, but they shall be
The terrors of the Earth! You think I'll weep.
No, I'll not weep.
Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws
Or ere I'll weep.--O Fool, I shall go mad!
This house is little. The old man and 's people
Cannot be well bestowed.
And must needs taste his folly.
For his particular, I'll receive him gladly,
But not one follower.
So am I purposed. Where is my lord of Gloucester?
Followed the old man forth.
He is returned.
He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.
My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
Alack, the night comes on, and the high winds
Do sorely ruffle. For many miles about
There's scarce a bush.
The injuries that they themselves procure
Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors.
He is attended with a desperate train,
And what they may incense him to, being apt
To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.
Shut up your doors, my lord. 'Tis a wild night.
My Regan counsels well. Come out o' th' storm.
One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
Contending with the fretful elements;
Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea
Or swell the curled waters 'bove the main,
That things might change or cease; tears his white
Which the impetuous blasts with eyeless rage
Catch in their fury and make nothing of;
Strives in his little world of man to outscorn
The to-and-fro conflicting wind and rain.
This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would
The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs
And bids what will take all.
None but the Fool, who labors to outjest
His heart-struck injuries.
And dare upon the warrant of my note
Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,
Although as yet the face of it is covered
With mutual cunning, 'twixt Albany and Cornwall,
Who have--as who have not, that their great stars
Throned and set high?--servants, who seem no less,
Which are to France the spies and speculations
Intelligent of our state. From France there comes
Into this scattered kingdom, who already,
Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
In some of our best ports and are at point
To show their open banner. Now to you:
If on my credit you dare build so far
To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
Some that will thank you, making just report
Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
The King hath cause to plain: what hath been seen,
Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,
Or the hard rein which both of them hath borne
Against the old kind king, or something deeper,
Whereof perchance these are but furnishings.
And from some knowledge and assurance offer
This office to you.
For confirmation that I am much more
Than my outwall, open this purse and take
What it contains.
If you shall see Cordelia
And she will tell you who that fellow is
That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
Give me your hand. Have you no more to say?
Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet:
That when we have found the King--in which your
That way, I'll this--he that first lights on him
Holla the other.
Blow winds, and crack your cheeks! Rage, blow!
You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
Till you have drenched our steeples, drowned the
You sulph'rous and thought-executing fires,
Vaunt-couriers of oak-cleaving thunderbolts,
Singe my white head. And thou, all-shaking
Strike flat the thick rotundity o' th' world.
Crack nature's molds, all germens spill at once
That makes ingrateful man.
Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! Spout, rain!
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters.
You owe me no subscription. Then let fall
Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand your slave,
But yet I call you servile ministers,
That will with two pernicious daughters join
Your high-engendered battles 'gainst a head
So old and white as this. O, ho, 'tis foul!
For there was never yet fair woman but she made
No, I will be the pattern of all patience.
Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night
Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies
Gallow the very wanderers of the dark
And make them keep their caves. Since I was man,
Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
Such groans of roaring wind and rain I never
Remember to have heard. Man's nature cannot carry
Th' affliction nor the fear.
That keep this dreadful pudder o'er our heads
Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,
That hast within thee undivulged crimes
Unwhipped of justice. Hide thee, thou bloody hand,
Thou perjured, and thou simular of virtue
That art incestuous. Caitiff, to pieces shake,
That under covert and convenient seeming
Has practiced on man's life. Close pent-up guilts,
Rive your concealing continents and cry
These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man
More sinned against than sinning.
Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel.
Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest.
Repose you there while I to this hard house--
More harder than the stones whereof 'tis raised,
Which even but now, demanding after you,
Denied me to come in--return and force
Their scanted courtesy.
Come on, my boy. How dost, my boy? Art cold?
The art of our necessities is strange
And can make vile things precious. Come, your
Poor Fool and knave, I have one part in my heart
That's sorry yet for thee.
True, my good boy.--Come, bring us to this hovel.
This prophecy Merlin shall make, for I live before
These injuries the King now bears will be revenged
Duke, that my charity be not of him perceived. If he
Edmund. Pray you, be careful.	
This courtesy forbid thee shall the Duke
Instantly know, and of that letter too.
This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
That which my father loses--no less than all.
The younger rises when the old doth fall.
Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter.
The tyranny of the open night 's too rough
For nature to endure.	
Good my lord, enter here.
Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm
Invades us to the skin. So 'tis to thee.
But where the greater malady is fixed,
The lesser is scarce felt. Thou 'dst shun a bear,
But if thy flight lay toward the roaring sea,
Thou 'dst meet the bear i' th' mouth. When the
The body's delicate. This tempest in my mind
Doth from my senses take all feeling else
Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
For lifting food to 't? But I will punish home.
No, I will weep no more. In such a night
To shut me out? Pour on. I will endure.
In such a night as this? O Regan, Goneril,
Your old kind father whose frank heart gave all!
No more of that.
Prithee, go in thyself. Seek thine own ease.
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more. But I'll go in.--
In, boy; go first.--You houseless poverty--
Nay, get thee in. I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.
Poor naked wretches, wheresoe'er you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
Your looped and windowed raggedness defend
From seasons such as these? O, I have ta'en
Too little care of this. Take physic, pomp.
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
That thou may'st shake the superflux to them
And show the heavens more just.
Poor Tom!
Has his daughters brought him to this pass?--
Couldst thou save nothing? Wouldst thou give 'em
Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!
Death, traitor! Nothing could have subdued nature
To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
Is it the fashion that discarded fathers
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
Judicious punishment! 'Twas this flesh begot
Those pelican daughters.
Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind;
Let him trot by.	
Come, unbutton here.	
Look, here comes a walking fire.
Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin! Peace, thou
What, hath your Grace no better company?
Our flesh and blood, my lord, is grown so vile
That it doth hate what gets it.
Go in with me. My duty cannot suffer
Though their injunction be to bar my doors
And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
Yet have I ventured to come seek you out
And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
First let me talk with this philosopher.
Good my lord, take his offer; go into th' house.
What is your study?
Importune him once more to go, my lord.
His wits begin t' unsettle.
His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent!
He said it would be thus, poor banished man.
Thou sayest the King grows mad; I'll tell thee,
Now outlawed from my blood. He sought my life
But lately, very late. I loved him, friend,
No father his son dearer. True to tell thee,
The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night's this!
In fellow, there, into th' hovel. Keep thee warm.
Good my lord, soothe him. Let him take the fellow.
Sirrah, come on: go along with us.
Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he
To have a thousand with red burning spits
Come hissing in upon 'em!
It shall be done. I will arraign them straight.
How do you, sir? Stand you not so amazed.
Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
Bench by his side.  You are o' th'
Sit you, too.
Purr the cat is gray.
And here's another whose warped looks proclaim
What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!
Arms, arms, sword, fire! Corruption in the place!
False justicer, why hast thou let her 'scape?
That you so oft have boasted to retain?
My tears begin to take his part so much
They mar my counterfeiting.
Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart, see, they bark at me.
Do de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes
Persian, but let them be changed.
Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
Draw the curtains. So, so, we'll go to supper i' th'
Come hither, friend. Where is the King my master?
Here, sir, but trouble him not; his wits are gone.
Good friend, I prithee, take him in thy arms.
There is a litter ready; lay him in 't,
And drive toward Dover, friend, where thou shalt
Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master.
If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
With thine and all that offer to defend him,
Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up,
And follow me, that will to some provision
Give thee quick conduct.
This rest might yet have balmed thy broken sinews,
Which, if convenience will not allow,
Stand in hard cure.  Come, help to
Thou must not stay behind.
When we our betters see bearing our woes,
We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
Who alone suffers suffers most i' th' mind,
Leaving free things and happy shows behind.
But then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip
When grief hath mates and bearing fellowship.
How light and portable my pain seems now
When that which makes me bend makes the King
He childed as I fathered. Tom, away.
Mark the high noises, and thyself bewray
When false opinion, whose wrong thoughts defile
In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.
What will hap more tonight, safe 'scape the King!
Lurk, lurk.
Farewell, my lord of Gloucester.
How now? Where's the King?
My lord of Gloucester hath conveyed him hence.
Some five- or six-and-thirty of his knights,
Hot questrists after him, met him at gate,
Who, with some other of the lord's dependents,
Are gone with him toward Dover, where they boast
To have well-armed friends.
Edmund, farewell.	
Go seek the traitor Gloucester.
Pinion him like a thief; bring him before us.
Though well we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of justice, yet our power
Shall do a court'sy to our wrath, which men
May blame but not control.
Who's there? The
What means your Graces? Good my friends,
You are my guests; do me no foul play, friends.
Bind him, I say.
Unmerciful lady as you are, I'm none.
To this chair bind him.	
Villain, thou shalt find--
By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done
To pluck me by the beard.
So white, and such a traitor?
These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin
Will quicken and accuse thee. I am your host;
With robber's hands my hospitable favors
You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?
Be simple-answered, for we know the truth.
And what confederacy have you with the traitors
Late footed in the kingdom?
You have sent the lunatic king. Speak.
Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,
And not from one opposed.
Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at
Wherefore to Dover? Let him answer that.
Because I would not see thy cruel nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister
In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
The sea, with such a storm as his bare head
In hell-black night endured, would have buoyed up
And quenched the stelled fires;
Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
If wolves had at thy gate howled that stern time,
Thou shouldst have said "Good porter, turn the
All cruels else subscribe. But I shall see
The winged vengeance overtake such children.
See 't shalt thou never.--Fellows, hold the chair.--
Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.
He that will think to live till he be old,
Give me some help!
One side will mock another. Th' other too.
If you see vengeance--
But better service have I never done you
Than now to bid you hold.
If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.
Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus?
To see some mischief on him. O!	
Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!
Where is thy luster now?
All dark and comfortless! Where's my son
Edmund?--
Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature
To quit this horrid act.
Thou call'st on him that hates thee. It was he
That made the overture of thy treasons to us,
Who is too good to pity thee.
Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him.
Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
His way to Dover.
How is 't, my lord? How look you?
Turn out that eyeless villain. Throw this slave
Upon the dunghill.--Regan, I bleed apace.
Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.
If this man come to good.
And in the end meet the old course of death,
Women will all turn monsters.
Let's follow the old earl and get the Bedlam
To lead him where he would. His roguish madness
Allows itself to anything.
Go thou. I'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs
To apply to his bleeding face. Now heaven help him!
Yet better thus, and known to be contemned,
Than still contemned and flattered. To be worst,
The lowest and most dejected thing of Fortune,
Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear.
The lamentable change is from the best;
The worst returns to laughter. Welcome, then,
Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace.
The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst
Owes nothing to thy blasts. But who comes here?
My father, poorly led? World, world, O world,
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
Life would not yield to age.
And your father's tenant these fourscore years.
Away, get thee away. Good friend, begone.
Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
Thee they may hurt.
Our means secure us, and our mere defects
Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,
The food of thy abused father's wrath,
Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
And worse I may be yet. The worst is not
So long as we can say "This is the worst."
Fellow, where goest?
He has some reason, else he could not beg.
Which made me think a man a worm. My son
Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard
As flies to wanton boys are we to th' gods;
They kill us for their sport.
Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
Ang'ring itself and others.--Bless thee, master.
Is that the naked fellow?
Then, prithee, get thee away. If for my sake
Thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain
And bring some covering for this naked soul,
Which I'll entreat to lead me.
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure.
Above the rest, begone.
Come on 't what will.	
Poor Tom's a-cold.  I cannot daub it further.
And yet I must.--Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
Poor Tom hath been scared out of his good wits.
Bless thee, good man's son, from the foul fiend.
Five fiends have been in Poor Tom at once: of lust,
Mahu, of stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet,
Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens'
Have humbled to all strokes. That I am wretched
Makes thee the happier. Heavens, deal so still:
Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,
That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
Because he does not feel, feel your power quickly.
So distribution should undo excess
And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
Looks fearfully in the confined deep.
Bring me but to the very brim of it,
And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
With something rich about me. From that place
Poor Tom shall lead thee.
Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband
Not met us on the way.
Now, where's your master?
Madam, within, but never man so changed.
He smiled at it. I told him you were coming;
His answer was "The worse." Of Gloucester's
And of the loyal service of his son
When I informed him, then he called me "sot"
And told me I had turned the wrong side out.
What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
What like, offensive.
It is the cowish terror of his spirit,
That dares not undertake. He'll not feel wrongs
Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother.
Hasten his musters and conduct his powers.
Into my husband's hands. This trusty servant
Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to
If you dare venture in your own behalf--
Decline your head.  This kiss, if it
Would stretch thy spirits up into the air.
Conceive, and fare thee well.
Yours in the ranks of death.	
Gloucester!
To thee a woman's services are due;
My fool usurps my body.
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Blows in your face. I fear your disposition.
That nature which contemns its origin
Cannot be bordered certain in itself.
She that herself will sliver and disbranch
From her material sap perforce must wither
And come to deadly use.
Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile.
Filths savor but themselves. What have you done?
Tigers, not daughters, what have you performed?
Whose reverence even the head-lugged bear would
Most barbarous, most degenerate, have you
Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
Send quickly down to tame these vile offenses,
It will come:
Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
Like monsters of the deep.
That bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;
Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
Thine honor from thy suffering; that not know'st
Fools do those villains pity who are punished
Ere they have done their mischief. Where's thy
France spreads his banners in our noiseless land,
With plumed helm thy state begins to threat,
Whilst thou, a moral fool, sits still and cries
Proper deformity shows not in the fiend
So horrid as in woman.
Thou changed and self-covered thing, for shame
Bemonster not thy feature. Were 't my fitness
To let these hands obey my blood,
They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
Thy flesh and bones. Howe'er thou art a fiend,
Slain by his servant, going to put out
The other eye of Gloucester.
Opposed against the act, bending his sword
To his great master, who, thereat enraged,
Flew on him and amongst them felled him dead,
But not without that harmful stroke which since
Hath plucked him after.
You justicers, that these our nether crimes
So speedily can venge. But, O poor Gloucester,
Lost he his other eye?
This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer.
But being widow and my Gloucester with her
May all the building in my fancy pluck
Upon my hateful life. Another way
The news is not so tart.--I'll read, and answer.
Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
Come with my lady hither.
No, my good lord. I met him back again.
Ay, my good lord. 'Twas he informed against him
And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
Might have the freer course.
To thank thee for the love thou show'd'st the King,
And to revenge thine eyes.--Come hither, friend.
Tell me what more thou know'st.
Ay, sir, she took them, read them in my
And now and then an ample tear trilled down
Her delicate cheek. It seemed she was a queen
Over her passion, who, most rebel-like,
Fought to be king o'er her.
Not to a rage. Patience and sorrow strove
Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
Sunshine and rain at once; her smiles and tears
Were like a better way. Those happy smilets
That played on her ripe lip seemed not to know
What guests were in her eyes, which parted thence
As pearls from diamonds dropped. In brief,
Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved
If all could so become it.
Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of
Pantingly forth, as if it pressed her heart;
Cried "Sisters, sisters, shame of ladies, sisters!
Kent, father, sisters! What, i' th' storm, i' th' night?
Let pity not be believed!" There she shook
The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
And clamor moistened. Then away she started,
To deal with grief alone.
The stars above us govern our conditions,
Else one self mate and make could not beget
Such different issues. You spoke not with her
Was this before the King returned?
Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' th' town,
Who sometime in his better tune remembers
What we are come about, and by no means
Will yield to see his daughter.
That stripped her from his benediction, turned her
To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
To his dog-hearted daughters--these things sting
His mind so venomously that burning shame
Detains him from Cordelia.
Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not?
Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear
And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause
Will in concealment wrap me up awhile.
When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go
Along with me.
Gentlemen, and Soldiers.]
Alack, 'tis he! Why, he was met even now
As mad as the vexed sea, singing aloud,
Crowned with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
With hardocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckooflowers,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our sustaining corn. A century send forth.
Search every acre in the high-grown field
And bring him to our eye.	
What can man's wisdom
In the restoring his bereaved sense?
He that helps him take all my outward worth.
Our foster nurse of nature is repose,
The which he lacks. That to provoke in him
Are many simples operative, whose power
Will close the eye of anguish.
All you unpublished virtues of the earth,
Spring with my tears. Be aidant and remediate
In the good man's distress. Seek, seek for him,
Lest his ungoverned rage dissolve the life
That wants the means to lead it.
The British powers are marching hitherward.
In expectation of them.--O dear father,
It is thy business that I go about.
Therefore great France
My mourning and importuned tears hath pitied.
No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
But love, dear love, and our aged father's right.
Soon may I hear and see him.
But are my brother's powers set forth?
Your sister is the better soldier.
Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
What might import my sister's letter to him?
Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
It was great ignorance, Gloucester's eyes being out,
To let him live. Where he arrives he moves
All hearts against us. Edmund, I think, is gone,
In pity of his misery, to dispatch
His nighted life; moreover to descry
The strength o' th' enemy.
Our troops set forth tomorrow. Stay with us.
The ways are dangerous.
My lady charged my duty in this business.
Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you
Transport her purposes by word? Belike,
Some things--I know not what. I'll love thee much--
Let me unseal the letter.
She gave strange eliads and most speaking looks
To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
Therefore I do advise you take this note:
My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talked,
And more convenient is he for my hand
Than for your lady's. You may gather more.
If you do find him, pray you, give him this,
And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
So, fare you well.
If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
Would I could meet him, madam. I should show
What party I do follow.
When shall I come to th' top of that same hill?
You do climb up it now. Look how we labor.
Methinks the ground is even.
Hark, do you hear the sea?
Why then, your other senses grow imperfect
By your eyes' anguish.
Methinks thy voice is altered and thou speak'st
In better phrase and matter than thou didst.
You're much deceived; in nothing am I changed
But in my garments.
Come on, sir. Here's the place. Stand still. How
And dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low!
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as beetles. Halfway down
Hangs one that gathers samphire--dreadful trade;
Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.
The fishermen that walk upon the beach
Appear like mice, and yond tall anchoring bark
Diminished to her cock, her cock a buoy
Almost too small for sight. The murmuring surge
That on th' unnumbered idle pebble chafes
Cannot be heard so high. I'll look no more
Lest my brain turn and the deficient sight
Topple down headlong.
Give me your hand. You are now within a foot
Of th' extreme verge. For all beneath the moon
Would I not leap upright.
Here, friend, 's another purse; in it a jewel
Well worth a poor man's taking. Fairies and gods
Prosper it with thee.	
Go thou further off.
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
Now fare you well, good sir.
Why I do trifle thus with his despair
Is done to cure it.
This world I do renounce, and in your sights
Shake patiently my great affliction off.
If I could bear it longer, and not fall
To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
My snuff and loathed part of nature should
Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!--
Now, fellow, fare thee well.	
And yet I know not how conceit may rob
The treasury of life, when life itself
Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought,
By this had thought been past. Alive or dead?--
Ho you, sir! Friend, hear you. Sir, speak.--
Thus might he pass indeed. Yet he revives.--
What are you, sir?
Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,
So many fathom down precipitating,
Thou 'dst shivered like an egg; but thou dost
Hast heavy substance, bleed'st not, speak'st, art
Ten masts at each make not the altitude
Which thou hast perpendicularly fell.
Thy life's a miracle. Speak yet again.
From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.
Look up a-height. The shrill-gorged lark so far
Cannot be seen or heard. Do but look up.
Is wretchedness deprived that benefit
To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort
When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage
And frustrate his proud will.
Up. So, how is 't? Feel you your legs? You stand.
Too well, too well.
Upon the crown o' th' cliff, what thing was that
Which parted from you?
As I stood here below, methought his eyes
Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,
Horns whelked and waved like the enraged sea.
It was some fiend. Therefore, thou happy father,
Think that the clearest gods, who make them
Of men's impossibilities, have preserved thee.
Affliction till it do cry out itself
Bear free and patient thoughts.
But who comes here?
The safer sense will ne'er accommodate
His master thus.
King himself.
The trick of that voice I do well remember.
Is 't not the King?
When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
Adultery? Thou shalt not die. Die for adultery? No.
The wren goes to 't, and the small gilded fly does
Gloucester's bastard son was kinder to his father
Shall so wear out to naught. Dost thou know me?
Were all thy letters suns, I could not see.
And my heart breaks at it.
Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thy own back.
Thou hotly lusts to use her in that kind
For which thou whipp'st her. The usurer hangs the
Through tattered clothes small vices do appear.
Robes and furred gowns hide all. Plate sin with
And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks.
Arm it in rags, a pygmy's straw does pierce it.
None does offend, none, I say, none; I'll able 'em.
Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
To seal th' accuser's lips. Get thee glass eyes,
And like a scurvy politician
Seem to see the things thou dost not. Now, now,
Pull off my boots. Harder, harder. So.
Reason in madness!
If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.
Thou must be patient. We came crying hither;
Thou know'st the first time that we smell the air
We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee. Mark.
When we are born, we cry that we are come
To this great stage of fools.--This' a good block.
It were a delicate stratagem to shoe
And when I have stol'n upon these son-in-laws,
Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!
Your most dear daughter--
No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even
The natural fool of Fortune. Use me well.
You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons;
Why, this would make a man a man of salt,
To use his eyes for garden waterpots,
Ay, and laying autumn's dust.
Masters, know you that?
You are a royal one, and we obey you.
Past speaking of in a king. Thou hast a daughter
Who redeems nature from the general curse
Which twain have brought her to.
Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?
Most sure and vulgar. Everyone hears that,
Which can distinguish sound.
How near's the other army?
Near and on speedy foot. The main descry
Stands on the hourly thought.
Though that the Queen on special cause is here,
Her army is moved on.
You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me;
Let not my worser spirit tempt me again
To die before you please.
Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand;
The bounty and the benison of heaven
To boot, and boot.
That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh
To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
Briefly thyself remember; the sword is out
That must destroy thee.
Put strength enough to 't.
Dar'st thou support a published traitor? Hence,
Lest that th' infection of his fortune take
Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
Nay, come not near th' old man. Keep out,
Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse.
If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,
And give the letters which thou find'st about me
To Edmund, Earl of Gloucester. Seek him out
Upon the English party. O, untimely death! Death!
As duteous to the vices of thy mistress
As badness would desire.
Let's see these pockets. The letters that he speaks of
May be my friends. He's dead; I am only sorry
He had no other deathsman. Let us see.
Leave, gentle wax, and, manners, blame us not.
To know our enemies' minds, we rip their hearts.
Their papers is more lawful.	
Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have
And the exchange my brother.--Here, in the sands
Thee I'll rake up, the post unsanctified
Of murderous lechers; and in the mature time
With this ungracious paper strike the sight
Of the death-practiced duke. For him 'tis well
That of thy death and business I can tell.
The King is mad. How stiff is my vile sense
That I stand up and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract.
So should my thoughts be severed from my griefs,
And woes, by wrong imaginations, lose
The knowledge of themselves.	
Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.
Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend.
Gentleman.]
To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,
And every measure fail me.
To be acknowledged, madam, is o'erpaid.
All my reports go with the modest truth,
Nor more, nor clipped, but so.
These weeds are memories of those worser hours.
Yet to be known shortens my made intent.
My boon I make it that you know me not
Till time and I think meet.
Then be 't so, my good lord.--How does the King?
Cure this great breach in his abused nature!
Th' untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up,
Of this child-changed father!
That we may wake the King? He hath slept
Be governed by your knowledge, and proceed
Ay, madam. In the heaviness of sleep,
We put fresh garments on him.
Be by, good madam, when we do awake him.
Please you, draw near.--Louder the music there.
Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss
Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
Have in thy reverence made.
Had you not been their father, these white flakes
Did challenge pity of them. Was this a face
To be opposed against the jarring winds?
To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder,
In the most terrible and nimble stroke
Of quick cross-lightning? To watch, poor perdu,
With this thin helm? Mine enemy's dog,
Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
Against my fire. And wast thou fain, poor father,
To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn
In short and musty straw? Alack, alack,
Had not concluded all.--He wakes. Speak to him.
How does my royal lord? How fares your Majesty?
You do me wrong to take me out o' th' grave.
Thou art a soul in bliss, but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do scald like molten lead.
You are a spirit, I know. Where did you die?
He's scarce awake. Let him alone awhile.
Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?
To see another thus. I know not what to say.
Of my condition!
And hold your hand in benediction o'er me.
No, sir, you must not kneel.
Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less,
And to deal plainly,
Methinks I should know you and know this man,
Yet I am doubtful, for I am mainly ignorant
What place this is, and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me,
For, as I am a man, I think this lady
To be my child Cordelia.
Be your tears wet? Yes, faith. I pray, weep not.
If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
Have, as I do remember, done me wrong.
You have some cause; they have not.
Be comforted, good madam. The great rage,
You see, is killed in him, and yet it is danger
To make him even o'er the time he has lost.
Desire him to go in. Trouble him no more
Till further settling.
Pray you now, forget, and forgive. I am old and
The powers of the kingdom approach apace.
My point and period will be throughly wrought,
Or well, or ill, as this day's battle's fought.
Gentlemen, and Soldiers.]
Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
Or whether since he is advised by aught
To change the course. He's full of alteration
And self-reproving. Bring his constant pleasure.
Our sister's man is certainly miscarried.
You know the goodness I intend upon you;
Tell me but truly, but then speak the truth,
Do you not love my sister?
But have you never found my brother's way
To the forfended place?
And bosomed with her as far as we call hers.
Be not familiar with her.
Fear me not. She and the Duke, her husband.
Should loosen him and me.
Our very loving sister, well bemet.--
Sir, this I heard: the King is come to his daughter,
With others whom the rigor of our state
Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
It touches us as France invades our land,
Not bolds the King, with others whom, I fear,
Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
Sir, you speak nobly.
Combine together 'gainst the enemy,
For these domestic and particular broils
Are not the question here.
With th' ancient of war on our proceeding.
Oho, I know the riddle.--I will go.
If e'er your Grace had speech with man so poor,
Hear me one word.
Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
For him that brought it. Wretched though I seem,
What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
Your business of the world hath so an end,
And machination ceases. Fortune love you.
When time shall serve, let but the herald cry
And I'll appear again.	
Why, fare thee well. I will o'erlook thy paper.
The enemy's in view. Draw up your powers.
Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
By diligent discovery. But your haste
Is now urged on you.
To both these sisters have I sworn my love,
Each jealous of the other as the stung
Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
Both? One? Or neither? Neither can be enjoyed
If both remain alive. To take the widow
Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril,
And hardly shall I carry out my side,
Her husband being alive. Now, then, we'll use
His countenance for the battle, which, being done,
Let her who would be rid of him devise
His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,
The battle done and they within our power,
Shall never see his pardon, for my state
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.
Cordelia, and Soldiers, over the stage, and exit.
Enter Edgar and Gloucester.]
Here, father, take the shadow of this tree
For your good host. Pray that the right may thrive.
If ever I return to you again,
Away, old man. Give me thy hand. Away.
King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en.
Give me thy hand. Come on.
No further, sir. A man may rot even here.
What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure
Their going hence even as their coming hither.
Ripeness is all. Come on.
Lear and Cordelia as prisoners; Soldiers, Captain.]
Some officers take them away. Good guard
Until their greater pleasures first be known
That are to censure them.
Who with best meaning have incurred the worst.
For thee, oppressed king, I am cast down.
Myself could else outfrown false Fortune's frown.
Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
No, no, no, no. Come, let's away to prison.
We two alone will sing like birds i' th' cage.
When thou dost ask me blessing, I'll kneel down
And ask of thee forgiveness. So we'll live,
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
Talk of court news, and we'll talk with them too--
Who loses and who wins; who's in, who's out--
And take upon 's the mystery of things,
As if we were God's spies. And we'll wear out,
In a walled prison, packs and sects of great ones
That ebb and flow by th' moon.
Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven
And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes.
The good years shall devour them, flesh and fell,
Ere they shall make us weep. We'll see 'em starved
Come.
Take thou this note. Go follow them to prison.
One step I have advanced thee. If thou dost
As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
To noble fortunes. Know thou this: that men
Are as the time is; to be tender-minded
Does not become a sword. Thy great employment
Will not bear question. Either say thou 'lt do 't,
Or thrive by other means.
About it, and write "happy" when th' hast done.
Mark, I say, instantly, and carry it so
As I have set it down.
If it be man's work, I'll do 't.	
Captain.]
Sir, you have showed today your valiant strain,
And Fortune led you well. You have the captives
Who were the opposites of this day's strife.
As we shall find their merits and our safety
May equally determine.
To send the old and miserable king
To some retention and appointed guard,
Whose age had charms in it, whose title more,
To pluck the common bosom on his side
And turn our impressed lances in our eyes,
Which do command them. With him I sent the
Queen,
My reason all the same, and they are ready
Tomorrow, or at further space, t' appear
Where you shall hold your session. At this time
We sweat and bleed. The friend hath lost his friend,
And the best quarrels in the heat are cursed
By those that feel their sharpness.
The question of Cordelia and her father
Requires a fitter place.
Not as a brother.
Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded
Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers,
Bore the commission of my place and person,
The which immediacy may well stand up
And call itself your brother.
In his own grace he doth exalt himself
More than in your addition.
By me invested, he compeers the best.
That were the most if he should husband you.
Jesters do oft prove prophets.
That eye that told you so looked but asquint.
Lady, I am not well, else I should answer
From a full-flowing stomach. 
General,
Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony.
Dispose of them, of me; the walls is thine.
Witness the world that I create thee here
My lord and master.
The let-alone lies not in your goodwill.
Nor in thine, lord.
Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.
Stay yet, hear reason.--Edmund, I arrest thee
On capital treason; and, in thine attaint,
This gilded serpent.--For your claim, fair
And I, her husband, contradict your banns.
If you will marry, make your loves to me.
My lady is bespoke.
Thou art armed, Gloucester. Let the trumpet sound.
If none appear to prove upon thy person
Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
There is my pledge.	
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
Than I have here proclaimed thee.
There's my exchange.	
What in the world he is
That names me traitor, villain-like he lies.
Call by the trumpet. He that dares approach,
On him, on you, who not, I will maintain
My truth and honor firmly.
Trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers,
All levied in my name, have in my name
Took their discharge.
She is not well. Convey her to my tent.
Come hither, herald. Let the trumpet sound,
And read out this.	
If any man of quality or degree, within the lists of the
Gloucester, that he is a manifold traitor, let him
Ask him his purposes, why he appears
Upon this call o' th' trumpet.
Your name, your quality, and why you answer
This present summons?
By treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.
Yet am I noble as the adversary
What's he that speaks for Edmund, Earl of
Gloucester?
Himself. What sayest thou to him?
That if my speech offend a noble heart,
Thy arm may do thee justice. Here is mine.
Behold, it is my privilege, the privilege of mine
My oath, and my profession. I protest,
Maugre thy strength, place, youth, and eminence,
Despite thy victor-sword and fire-new fortune,
Thy valor, and thy heart, thou art a traitor,
False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father,
Conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince,
And from th' extremest upward of thy head
To the descent and dust below thy foot,
This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent
To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
Thou liest.
But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
What safe and nicely I might well delay
By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn.
Back do I toss these treasons to thy head,
With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart,
Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,
This sword of mine shall give them instant way,
Where they shall rest forever. Trumpets, speak!
Save him, save him!
By th' law of war, thou wast not bound to answer
An unknown opposite. Thou art not vanquished,
But cozened and beguiled.
Or with this paper shall I stopple it.--Hold, sir.--
Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.
No tearing, lady. I perceive you know it.
Say if I do; the laws are mine, not thine.
Who can arraign me for 't?
Know'st thou this paper?
Go after her, she's desperate. Govern her.
What you have charged me with, that have I done,
And more, much more. The time will bring it out.
That hast this fortune on me? If thou 'rt noble,
If more, the more th' hast wronged me.
My name is Edgar and thy father's son.
The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
Make instruments to plague us.
The dark and vicious place where thee he got
Cost him his eyes.
The wheel is come full circle; I am here.
Methought thy very gait did prophesy
Let sorrow split my heart if ever I
Did hate thee or thy father!
How have you known the miseries of your father?
By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale,
And when 'tis told, O, that my heart would burst!
The bloody proclamation to escape
That followed me so near--O, our lives' sweetness,
That we the pain of death would hourly die
Rather than die at once!--taught me to shift
Into a madman's rags, t' assume a semblance
That very dogs disdained, and in this habit
Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
Their precious stones new lost; became his guide,
Led him, begged for him, saved him from despair.
Never--O fault!--revealed myself unto him
Until some half hour past, when I was armed.
Not sure, though hoping of this good success,
Told him our pilgrimage. But his flawed heart
Burst smilingly.
And shall perchance do good. But speak you on.
You look as you had something more to say.
If there be more, more woeful, hold it in,
For I am almost ready to dissolve,
Hearing of this.
To such as love not sorrow; but another,
To amplify too much, would make much more
And top extremity. Whilst I
Was big in clamor, came there in a man
Who, having seen me in my worst estate,
Shunned my abhorred society; but then, finding
Who 'twas that so endured, with his strong arms
He fastened on my neck and bellowed out
As he'd burst heaven, threw him on my father,
Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
That ever ear received, which, in recounting,
His grief grew puissant, and the strings of life
Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets sounded,
And there I left him tranced.
Kent, sir, the banished Kent, who in disguise
Followed his enemy king and did him service
Improper for a slave.
Help, help, O, help!
Of--O, she's dead!
Your lady, sir, your lady. And her sister
By her is poisoned. She confesses it.
Now marry in an instant.
Produce the bodies, be they alive or dead.
This judgment of the heavens, that makes us
Touches us not with pity. O, is this he?
Which very manners urges.
To bid my king and master aye goodnight.
Is he not here?
Speak, Edmund, where's the King? And where's
Cordelia?
Seest thou this object, Kent?
The one the other poisoned for my sake,
And after slew herself.
Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send--
Be brief in it--to th' castle, for my writ
Is on the life of Lear, and on Cordelia.
Nay, send in time.
To who, my lord?  Who has the office?
Send
Thy token of reprieve.
Well thought on. Take my sword. Give it the
Captain.
He hath commission from thy wife and me
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and
To lay the blame upon her own despair,
That she fordid herself.
The gods defend her!--Bear him hence awhile.
Howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones!
Had I your tongues and eyes, I'd use them so
That heaven's vault should crack. She's gone
She's dead as earth.--Lend me a looking glass.
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
Why, then she lives.
Or image of that horror?
This feather stirs. She lives. If it be so,
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
That ever I have felt.
Prithee, away.
Cordelia, Cordelia, stay a little. Ha!
What is 't thou sayst?--Her voice was ever soft,
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
And these same crosses spoil me.  Who
Mine eyes are not o' th' best. I'll tell you straight.
If Fortune brag of two she loved and hated,
One of them we behold.
This is a dull sight. Are you not Kent?
Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius?
He's a good fellow, I can tell you that.
He'll strike and quickly too. He's dead and rotten.
No, my good lord, I am the very man--
That from your first of difference and decay
Have followed your sad steps.
Nor no man else. All's cheerless, dark, and deadly.
Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
And desperately are dead.
He knows not what he says, and vain is it
That we present us to him.
You lords and noble friends, know our intent:
What comfort to this great decay may come
Shall be applied. For us, we will resign,
During the life of this old Majesty,
To him our absolute power; you to your rights,
With boot and such addition as your Honors
Have more than merited. All friends shall taste
The wages of their virtue, and all foes
The cup of their deservings. O, see, see!
And my poor fool is hanged. No, no, no life?
Why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life,
And thou no breath at all? Thou 'lt come no more,
Never, never, never, never, never.--
Pray you undo this button. Thank you, sir.
Do you see this? Look on her, look, her lips,
Look there, look there!	
Break, heart, I prithee, break!
Vex not his ghost. O, let him pass! He hates him
That would upon the rack of this tough world
Stretch him out longer.
The wonder is he hath endured so long.
He but usurped his life.
Bear them from hence. Our present business
Is general woe.  Friends of my
Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.
My master calls me. I must not say no.
The weight of this sad time we must obey,
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
The oldest hath borne most; we that are young
Shall never see so much nor live so long.
Open your ears, for which of you will stop
The vent of hearing when loud Rumor speaks?
Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold
The acts commenced on this ball of earth.
Upon my tongues continual slanders ride,
The which in every language I pronounce,
Stuffing the ears of men with false reports.
Under the smile of safety wounds the world.
And who but Rumor, who but only I,
Make fearful musters and prepared defense
Whiles the big year, swoll'n with some other grief,
Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war,
And no such matter? Rumor is a pipe
Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures,
And of so easy and so plain a stop
That the blunt monster with uncounted heads,
The still-discordant wav'ring multitude,
Can play upon it. But what need I thus
My well-known body to anatomize
Among my household? Why is Rumor here?
Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury
Hath beaten down young Hotspur and his troops,
Quenching the flame of bold rebellion
Even with the rebels' blood. But what mean I
To speak so true at first? My office is
To noise abroad that Harry Monmouth fell
Under the wrath of noble Hotspur's sword,
And that the King before the Douglas' rage
Stooped his anointed head as low as death.
This have I rumored through the peasant towns
Between that royal field of Shrewsbury
And this worm-eaten hold of ragged stone,
Where Hotspur's father, old Northumberland,
Lies crafty-sick. The posts come tiring on,
And not a man of them brings other news
Than they have learnt of me. From Rumor's
They bring smooth comforts false, worse than
Who keeps the gate here, ho?
Where is the Earl?
What shall I say you are?
That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here.
His Lordship is walked forth into the orchard.
Please it your Honor knock but at the gate
And he himself will answer.
What news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute now
Should be the father of some stratagem.
The times are wild. Contention, like a horse
Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose
And bears down all before him.
Good, an God will!
The King is almost wounded to the death,
And, in the fortune of my lord your son,
Prince Harry slain outright; and both the Blunts
Killed by the hand of Douglas; young Prince John
And Westmoreland and Stafford fled the field;
And Harry Monmouth's brawn, the hulk Sir John,
Is prisoner to your son. O, such a day,
So fought, so followed, and so fairly won,
Came not till now to dignify the times
Since Caesar's fortunes.
Saw you the field? Came you from Shrewsbury?
That freely rendered me these news for true.
Here comes my servant Travers, who I sent
On Tuesday last to listen after news.
My lord, I overrode him on the way,
And he is furnished with no certainties
More than he haply may retail from me.
Now, Travers, what good tidings comes with you?
My lord, Sir John Umfrevile turned me back
With joyful tidings and, being better horsed,
Outrode me. After him came spurring hard
That stopped by me to breathe his bloodied horse.
He asked the way to Chester, and of him
He told me that rebellion had bad luck
And that young Harry Percy's spur was cold.
With that he gave his able horse the head
And, bending forward, struck his armed heels
Against the panting sides of his poor jade
Up to the rowel-head, and starting so
He seemed in running to devour the way,
Staying no longer question.
Said he young Harry Percy's spur was cold?
Of Hotspur, Coldspur? That rebellion
Had met ill luck?
If my young lord your son have not the day,
Upon mine honor, for a silken point
Why should that gentleman that rode by Travers
Give then such instances of loss?
He was some hilding fellow that had stol'n
The horse he rode on and, upon my life,
Spoke at a venture.
Look, here comes more news.
Yea, this man's brow, like to a title leaf,
Foretells the nature of a tragic volume.
So looks the strand whereon the imperious flood
Hath left a witnessed usurpation.--
Say, Morton, didst thou come from Shrewsbury?
Where hateful death put on his ugliest mask
To fright our party.
Thou tremblest, and the whiteness in thy cheek
Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand.
Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in look, so woebegone,
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night
And would have told him half his Troy was burnt;
But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue,
And I my Percy's death ere thou report'st it.
This thou wouldst say: "Your son did thus and thus;
Your brother thus; so fought the noble Douglas"--
Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds.
But in the end, to stop my ear indeed,
Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise,
Ending with "Brother, son, and all are dead."
Douglas is living, and your brother yet,
But for my lord your son--
See what a ready tongue suspicion hath!
He that but fears the thing he would not know
Hath, by instinct, knowledge from others' eyes
That what he feared is chanced. Yet speak,
Morton.
Tell thou an earl his divination lies,
And I will take it as a sweet disgrace
And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.
You are too great to be by me gainsaid,
Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.
Yet, for all this, say not that Percy's dead.
Thou shak'st thy head and hold'st it fear or sin
To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so.
The tongue offends not that reports his death;
And he doth sin that doth belie the dead,
Not he which says the dead is not alive.
Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news
Hath but a losing office, and his tongue
Sounds ever after as a sullen bell
Remembered tolling a departing friend.
That which I would to God I had not seen,
But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state,
Rend'ring faint quittance, wearied and outbreathed,
To Harry Monmouth, whose swift wrath beat down
The never-daunted Percy to the earth,
From whence with life he never more sprung up.
In few, his death, whose spirit lent a fire
Even to the dullest peasant in his camp,
Being bruited once, took fire and heat away
From the best-tempered courage in his troops;
For from his mettle was his party steeled,
Which, once in him abated, all the rest
Turned on themselves, like dull and heavy lead.
And as the thing that's heavy in itself
Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed,
So did our men, heavy in Hotspur's loss,
Lend to this weight such lightness with their fear
That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim
Than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety,
Fly from the field. Then was that noble Worcester
So soon ta'en prisoner; and that furious Scot,
The bloody Douglas, whose well-laboring sword
Had three times slain th' appearance of the King,
Gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame
Of those that turned their backs and in his flight,
Stumbling in fear, was took. The sum of all
Is that the King hath won and hath sent out
Under the conduct of young Lancaster
And Westmoreland. This is the news at full.
For this I shall have time enough to mourn.
In poison there is physic, and these news,
Having been well, that would have made me sick,
Being sick, have in some measure made me well.
And as the wretch whose fever-weakened joints,
Like strengthless hinges, buckle under life,
Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire
Out of his keeper's arms, even so my limbs,
Weakened with grief, being now enraged with
Are thrice themselves. Hence therefore, thou
Must glove this hand. And hence, thou sickly
Thou art a guard too wanton for the head
Which princes, fleshed with conquest, aim to hit.
Now bind my brows with iron, and approach
The ragged'st hour that time and spite dare bring
To frown upon th' enraged Northumberland.
Let heaven kiss Earth! Now let not Nature's hand
Keep the wild flood confined. Let order die,
And let this world no longer be a stage
To feed contention in a lingering act;
But let one spirit of the firstborn Cain
Reign in all bosoms, that, each heart being set
On bloody courses, the rude scene may end,
And darkness be the burier of the dead.
This strained passion doth you wrong, my lord.
Sweet earl, divorce not wisdom from your honor.
The lives of all your loving complices
Lean on your health, the which, if you give o'er
To stormy passion, must perforce decay.
You cast th' event of war, my noble lord,
And summed the accompt of chance before you
That in the dole of blows your son might drop.
You knew he walked o'er perils on an edge,
More likely to fall in than to get o'er.
You were advised his flesh was capable
Of wounds and scars, and that his forward spirit
Would lift him where most trade of danger
Yet did you say "Go forth," and none of this,
Though strongly apprehended, could restrain
The stiff-borne action. What hath then befall'n,
Or what did this bold enterprise bring forth,
More than that being which was like to be?
We all that are engaged to this loss
Knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas
That if we wrought out life, 'twas ten to one;
And yet we ventured, for the gain proposed
Choked the respect of likely peril feared;
And since we are o'erset, venture again.
Come, we will all put forth, body and goods.
The gentle Archbishop of York is up
With well-appointed powers. He is a man
Who with a double surety binds his followers.
My lord your son had only but the corpse,
But shadows and the shows of men, to fight;
For that same word "rebellion" did divide
The action of their bodies from their souls,
And they did fight with queasiness, constrained,
As men drink potions, that their weapons only
Seemed on our side. But, for their spirits and
This word "rebellion," it had froze them up
As fish are in a pond. But now the Bishop
Turns insurrection to religion.
Supposed sincere and holy in his thoughts,
He's followed both with body and with mind,
And doth enlarge his rising with the blood
Of fair King Richard, scraped from Pomfret
Derives from heaven his quarrel and his cause;
Tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land,
Gasping for life under great Bolingbroke;
And more and less do flock to follow him.
This present grief had wiped it from my mind.
Go in with me and counsel every man
The aptest way for safety and revenge.
Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed.
Never so few, and never yet more need.
The brain of this foolish-compounded clay, man, is
Prince put thee into my service for any other reason
Thou whoreson mandrake, thou art fitter to be
God his tongue be hotter! A whoreson Achitophel, a
Bardolph.
King lack subjects? Do not the rebels need soldiers?
Though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it is
Setting my knighthood and my soldiership aside, I
You may thank th' unquiet time for your quiet
And will you yet call yourself young? Fie, fie, fie, Sir
John.
Prince Harry. I hear you are going with Lord John
Northumberland.
Marshal), the Lord Hastings, and Lord Bardolph.]
Thus have you heard our cause and known our
And, my most noble friends, I pray you all
Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes.
And first, Lord Marshal, what say you to it?
But gladly would be better satisfied
How in our means we should advance ourselves
To look with forehead bold and big enough
Upon the power and puissance of the King.
Our present musters grow upon the file
To five-and-twenty thousand men of choice,
And our supplies live largely in the hope
Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns
With an incensed fire of injuries.
The question, then, Lord Hastings, standeth thus:
Whether our present five-and-twenty thousand
May hold up head without Northumberland.
With him we may.
But if without him we be thought too feeble,
My judgment is we should not step too far
Till we had his assistance by the hand.
For in a theme so bloody-faced as this,
Conjecture, expectation, and surmise
Of aids incertain should not be admitted.
It was young Hotspur's cause at Shrewsbury.
It was, my lord; who lined himself with hope,
Eating the air and promise of supply,
Flatt'ring himself in project of a power
Much smaller than the smallest of his thoughts,
And so, with great imagination
Proper to madmen, led his powers to death
And, winking, leapt into destruction.
But, by your leave, it never yet did hurt
To lay down likelihoods and forms of hope.
Yes, if this present quality of war --
Indeed the instant action, a cause on foot--
Lives so in hope, as in an early spring
We see th' appearing buds, which to prove fruit
Hope gives not so much warrant as despair
That frosts will bite them. When we mean to build,
We first survey the plot, then draw the model,
And when we see the figure of the house,
Then must we rate the cost of the erection,
Which if we find outweighs ability,
What do we then but draw anew the model
In fewer offices, or at least desist
To build at all? Much more in this great work,
Which is almost to pluck a kingdom down
And set another up, should we survey
The plot of situation and the model,
Consent upon a sure foundation,
Question surveyors, know our own estate,
How able such a work to undergo,
To weigh against his opposite. Or else
We fortify in paper and in figures,
Using the names of men instead of men,
Like one that draws the model of an house
Beyond his power to build it, who, half through,
Gives o'er and leaves his part-created cost
And waste for churlish winter's tyranny.
Grant that our hopes, yet likely of fair birth,
Should be stillborn and that we now possessed
The utmost man of expectation,
Even as we are, to equal with the King.
What, is the King but five-and-twenty thousand?
To us no more, nay, not so much, Lord Bardolph,
For his divisions, as the times do brawl,
Are in three heads: one power against the French,
And one against Glendower; perforce a third
Must take up us. So is the unfirm king
In three divided, and his coffers sound
With hollow poverty and emptiness.
That he should draw his several strengths together
And come against us in full puissance
Need not to be dreaded.
He leaves his back unarmed, the French and Welsh
Baying him at the heels. Never fear that.
Who is it like should lead his forces hither?
The Duke of Lancaster and Westmoreland;
Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth;
But who is substituted against the French
And publish the occasion of our arms.
The commonwealth is sick of their own choice.
Their over-greedy love hath surfeited.
An habitation giddy and unsure
Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.
Didst thou beat heaven with blessing Bolingbroke
Before he was what thou wouldst have him be.
And being now trimmed in thine own desires,
Thou, beastly feeder, art so full of him
That thou provok'st thyself to cast him up.
So, so, thou common dog, didst thou disgorge
Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard,
And now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up
And howl'st to find it. What trust is in these
They that, when Richard lived, would have him die
Are now become enamored on his grave.
Thou, that threw'st dust upon his goodly head
When through proud London he came sighing on
After th' admired heels of Bolingbroke,
Criest now "O earth, yield us that king again,
And take thou this!" O thoughts of men accursed!
Past and to come seems best; things present,
Shall we go draw our numbers and set on?
We are time's subjects, and time bids begone.
Fang and Snare, who lags behind.]
Will he stand to 't?
Fang, hold him sure. Good Master Snare, let him
Street, to Master Smooth's the silkman. I pray you,
Bardolph, with him. Do your offices, do your offices,
Master Fang and Master Snare, do me, do me,
Quickly.
Ah, thou honeyseed rogue, thou art a honeyseed, a
What is the matter? Keep the peace here, ho!
How now, Sir John? What, are you brawling here?
Doth this become your place, your time, and
You should have been well on your way to York.--
Stand from him, fellow. Wherefore hang'st thou
Grace, I am a poor widow of Eastcheap, and he is
Canst thou deny it? Did not Goodwife Keech, the
Quickly, coming in to borrow a mess of vinegar,
The King, my lord, and Harry Prince of Wales
Are near at hand. The rest the paper tells.
Prodigal or the German hunting in waterwork is
No. Fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse
Are marched up to my Lord of Lancaster
Against Northumberland and the Archbishop.
Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?
You shall have letters of me presently.
Come. Go along with me, good Master Gower.
What a disgrace is it to me to remember thy name,
Bardolph.
Grace's coming to town. There's a letter for you.
Martlemas your master?
Every man must know that as oft as he has occasion
King, for they never prick their finger but they say
Falstaff, knight, to the son of the King nearest his
Jack Falstaff with my familiars,
John with my brothers and sisters, and
Sir John with all Europe.
But do you use me thus, Ned? Must I marry your
Mistress Doll Tearsheet.
This Doll Tearsheet should be some road.
Saint Albans and London.
Ned.
Harry Percy.]
Give even way unto my rough affairs.
Put not you on the visage of the times
And be, like them, to Percy troublesome.
Do what you will; your wisdom be your guide.
Alas, sweet wife, my honor is at pawn,
And, but my going, nothing can redeem it.
The time was, father, that you broke your word
When you were more endeared to it than now,
When your own Percy, when my heart's dear Harry,
Threw many a northward look to see his father
Bring up his powers; but he did long in vain.
Who then persuaded you to stay at home?
There were two honors lost, yours and your son's.
For yours, the God of heaven brighten it.
For his, it stuck upon him as the sun
In the gray vault of heaven, and by his light
Did all the chivalry of England move
To do brave acts. He was indeed the glass
Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves.
He had no legs that practiced not his gait;
And speaking thick, which nature made his blemish,
Became the accents of the valiant;
For those that could speak low and tardily
Would turn their own perfection to abuse
To seem like him. So that in speech, in gait,
In diet, in affections of delight,
In military rules, humors of blood,
He was the mark and glass, copy and book,
That fashioned others. And him--O wondrous him!
Second to none, unseconded by you,
To look upon the hideous god of war
In disadvantage, to abide a field
Where nothing but the sound of Hotspur's name
Did seem defensible. So you left him.
Never, O never, do his ghost the wrong
To hold your honor more precise and nice
With others than with him. Let them alone.
The Marshal and the Archbishop are strong.
Had my sweet Harry had but half their numbers,
Today might I, hanging on Hotspur's neck,
Have talked of Monmouth's grave.
Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me
With new lamenting ancient oversights.
But I must go and meet with danger there,
Or it will seek me in another place
And find me worse provided.
Till that the nobles and the armed commons
Have of their puissance made a little taste.
If they get ground and vantage of the King,
Then join you with them like a rib of steel
To make strength stronger; but, for all our loves,
First let them try themselves. So did your son;
He was so suffered. So came I a widow,
And never shall have length of life enough
To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes
That it may grow and sprout as high as heaven
For recordation to my noble husband.
Come, come, go in with me. 'Tis with my mind
As with the tide swelled up unto his height,
That makes a still-stand, running neither way.
Fain would I go to meet the Archbishop,
But many thousand reasons hold me back.
Till time and vantage crave my company.
Poins anon, and they will put on two of our jerkins
Bardolph hath brought word.
When Arthur first in court--
And was a worthy king--
How now, Mistress Doll?
Doll, we catch of you. Grant that, my poor virtue,
You cannot one bear with another's confirmities.
What the good-year! One must bear, and 
Bordeaux stuff in him. You have not seen a hulk
Now he said so, I can tell whereupon. "For," says
Receive," says he, "no swaggering companions."
There comes none here. You would bless you to
Call him up, drawer.	
What, you poor, base, rascally, cheating lack-linen
By this wine, I'll thrust my knife in your mouldy
For tearing a poor whore's ruff in a bawdy house?
He a captain! Hang him, rogue. He lives upon
God's light, these villains will make the word as
Bardolph, I could tear her. I'll be revenged of her.
Down, down, dogs! Down, Fates! Have we not
Hiren here?	
Caesars and with cannibals and Troyant Greeks?
Nay, rather damn them with King Cerberus, and let
What the good-year, do you think I would deny her?
For God's sake, be quiet.
Three. Come, Atropos, I say.
Methought he made a shrewd thrust at your belly.
Come on, you whoreson chops. Ah, rogue, i' faith, I
Doll. A rascal bragging slave! The rogue fled from
Thou whoreson little tidy Bartholomew boar-pig,
Wales?
Prince)] that the wicked might not fall in love with
The King your father is at Westminster,
And there are twenty weak and wearied posts
Come from the north, and as I came along
Bareheaded, sweating, knocking at the taverns
And asking everyone for Sir John Falstaff.
By heaven, Poins, I feel me much to blame
So idly to profane the precious time
When tempest of commotion, like the south
Borne with black vapor, doth begin to melt
And drop upon our bare unarmed heads.--
Give me my sword and cloak.--Falstaff, good
You must away to court, sir, presently.
Farewell, hostess.--Farewell, Doll. You see, my
The undeserver may sleep when the man of action
She comes blubbered.--Yea! Will you come, Doll?
Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick;
But, ere they come, bid them o'erread these letters
And well consider of them. Make good speed.
How many thousand of my poorest subjects
Are at this hour asleep! O sleep, O gentle sleep,
Nature's soft nurse, how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down
And steep my senses in forgetfulness?
Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs,
Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
And hushed with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber,
Than in the perfumed chambers of the great,
Under the canopies of costly state,
And lulled with sound of sweetest melody?
In loathsome beds and leavest the kingly couch
Wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast
Seal up the shipboy's eyes and rock his brains
In cradle of the rude imperious surge
And in the visitation of the winds,
Who take the ruffian billows by the top,
Curling their monstrous heads and hanging them
With deafing clamor in the slippery clouds
That with the hurly death itself awakes?
Canst thou, O partial sleep, give thy repose
To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude,
And, in the calmest and most stillest night,
With all appliances and means to boot,
Deny it to a king? Then, happy low, lie down.
Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.
Many good morrows to your Majesty.
Why then, good morrow to you all, my lords.
Have you read o'er the letter that I sent you?
Then you perceive the body of our kingdom
How foul it is, what rank diseases grow,
And with what danger near the heart of it.
It is but as a body yet distempered,
Which to his former strength may be restored
With good advice and little medicine.
My Lord Northumberland will soon be cooled.
And see the revolution of the times
Make mountains level, and the continent,
Weary of solid firmness, melt itself
Into the sea, and other times to see
The beachy girdle of the ocean
Too wide for Neptune's hips; how chance's mocks
And changes fill the cup of alteration
With divers liquors! O, if this were seen,
The happiest youth, viewing his progress through,
What perils past, what crosses to ensue,
Would shut the book and sit him down and die.
Since Richard and Northumberland, great friends,
Did feast together, and in two years after
Were they at wars. It is but eight years since
This Percy was the man nearest my soul,
Who like a brother toiled in my affairs
And laid his love and life under my foot,
Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard
Gave him defiance. But which of you was by--
When Richard, with his eye brimful of tears,
Then checked and rated by Northumberland,
Did speak these words, now proved a prophecy?
My cousin Bolingbroke ascends my throne"--
Though then, God knows, I had no such intent,
But that necessity so bowed the state
That I and greatness were compelled to kiss--
Shall break into corruption"--so went on,
Foretelling this same time's condition
And the division of our amity.
There is a history in all men's lives
Figuring the natures of the times deceased,
The which observed, a man may prophesy,
With a near aim, of the main chance of things
As yet not come to life, who in their seeds
And weak beginning lie intreasured.
Such things become the hatch and brood of time,
And by the necessary form of this,
King Richard might create a perfect guess
That great Northumberland, then false to him,
Would of that seed grow to a greater falseness,
Which should not find a ground to root upon
Unless on you.
Then let us meet them like necessities.
And that same word even now cries out on us.
They say the Bishop and Northumberland
Are fifty thousand strong.
Rumor doth double, like the voice and echo,
The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace
To go to bed. Upon my soul, my lord,
The powers that you already have sent forth
Shall bring this prize in very easily.
To comfort you the more, I have received
Your Majesty hath been this fortnight ill,
And these unseasoned hours perforce must add
Unto your sickness.
And were these inward wars once out of hand,
We would, dear lords, unto the Holy Land.
And your fairest daughter and mine, my goddaughter
Ellen?
William is become a good scholar. He is at Oxford
Court again. And I may say to you, we knew where
John, a boy, and page to Thomas Mowbray, Duke of
Norfolk.
Death, as the Psalmist saith, is certain to all. All
Fair?
John.--Give me your good hand, give me your
Worship's good hand. By my troth, you like well and
Robert Shallow.--Master Sure-card, as I think?
Let them appear as I call, let them do so, let them
Let me see, where is Mouldy?
He's like to be a cold soldier.
Prick the woman's tailor well, Master Shallow,
Feeble.
Bullcalf till he roar again.
We will have away thy cold, and I will take such
You must have but four here, sir, and so I pray you
Master Shallow.
She was then a bona roba. Doth she hold her own
Shallow.
Jesus, the days that we have seen! Come, come.
French crowns for you. 
In very truth, sir, I had as lief be hanged, sir, as go.
And yet, for mine own part, sir, I do not care, but
Shadow.
They are your likeliest men, and I would have you
Thas, thas, thas.
Well said, i' faith, Wart. Th' art a good scab. Hold,
Clement's Inn--I was then Sir Dagonet in Arthur's
Bardolph, give the soldiers coats.
Peradventure I will with you to the court.
Shallow.
On, Bardolph. Lead the men away.
As I return, I will fetch off these justices. I do see
Bardolph, Hastings, and their officers within the Forest
Here stand, my lords, and send discoverers forth
To know the numbers of our enemies.
We have sent forth already.
My friends and brethren in these great affairs,
New-dated letters from Northumberland,
Their cold intent, tenor, and substance, thus:
Here doth he wish his person, with such powers
As might hold sortance with his quality,
The which he could not levy; whereupon
He is retired, to ripe his growing fortunes,
To Scotland, and concludes in hearty prayers
That your attempts may overlive the hazard
And fearful meeting of their opposite.
Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground
And dash themselves to pieces.
West of this forest, scarcely off a mile,
In goodly form comes on the enemy,
And, by the ground they hide, I judge their number
Upon or near the rate of thirty thousand.
The just proportion that we gave them out.
Let us sway on and face them in the field.
What well-appointed leader fronts us here?
Health and fair greeting from our general,
The Prince Lord John and Duke of Lancaster.
Say on, my Lord of Westmoreland, in peace,
What doth concern your coming.
Unto your Grace do I in chief address
The substance of my speech. If that rebellion
Came like itself, in base and abject routs,
Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rage,
And countenanced by boys and beggary--
In his true, native, and most proper shape,
You, reverend father, and these noble lords
Had not been here to dress the ugly form
Of base and bloody insurrection
With your fair honors. You, Lord Archbishop,
Whose see is by a civil peace maintained,
Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touched,
Whose learning and good letters peace hath tutored,
Whose white investments figure innocence,
The dove and very blessed spirit of peace,
Wherefore do you so ill translate yourself
Out of the speech of peace, that bears such grace,
Into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war,
Turning your books to graves, your ink to blood,
Your pens to lances, and your tongue divine
To a loud trumpet and a point of war?
Wherefore do I this? So the question stands.
Briefly, to this end: we are all diseased
And with our surfeiting and wanton hours
Have brought ourselves into a burning fever,
And we must bleed for it; of which disease
Our late King Richard, being infected, died.
But, my most noble Lord of Westmoreland,
Nor do I as an enemy to peace
Troop in the throngs of military men,
But rather show awhile like fearful war
To diet rank minds sick of happiness
And purge th' obstructions which begin to stop
Our very veins of life. Hear me more plainly.
What wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we
And find our griefs heavier than our offenses.
We see which way the stream of time doth run
And are enforced from our most quiet there
By the rough torrent of occasion,
And have the summary of all our griefs,
When time shall serve, to show in articles;
Which long ere this we offered to the King
And might by no suit gain our audience.
When we are wronged and would unfold our griefs,
We are denied access unto his person
Even by those men that most have done us wrong.
The dangers of the days but newly gone,
Whose memory is written on the earth
With yet-appearing blood, and the examples
Of every minute's instance, present now,
Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms,
Not to break peace or any branch of it,
But to establish here a peace indeed,
Concurring both in name and quality.
Whenever yet was your appeal denied?
Wherein have you been galled by the King?
What peer hath been suborned to grate on you,
That you should seal this lawless bloody book
Of forged rebellion with a seal divine
And consecrate commotion's bitter edge?
My brother general, the commonwealth,
To brother born an household cruelty,
There is no need of any such redress,
Or if there were, it not belongs to you.
Why not to him in part, and to us all
That feel the bruises of the days before
And suffer the condition of these times
To lay a heavy and unequal hand
Upon our honors?
Construe the times to their necessities,
And you shall say indeed it is the time,
And not the King, that doth you injuries.
Yet for your part, it not appears to me
Either from the King or in the present time
That you should have an inch of any ground
To build a grief on. Were you not restored
To all the Duke of Norfolk's seigniories,
Your noble and right well remembered father's?
What thing, in honor, had my father lost
That need to be revived and breathed in me?
The King that loved him, as the state stood then,
Was force perforce compelled to banish him,
And then that Henry Bolingbroke and he,
Being mounted and both roused in their seats,
Their neighing coursers daring of the spur,
Their armed staves in charge, their beavers down,
Their eyes of fire sparkling through sights of steel,
And the loud trumpet blowing them together,
Then, then, when there was nothing could have
My father from the breast of Bolingbroke,
His own life hung upon the staff he threw--
Then threw he down himself and all their lives
That by indictment and by dint of sword
Have since miscarried under Bolingbroke.
You speak, Lord Mowbray, now you know not what.
The Earl of Hereford was reputed then
In England the most valiant gentleman.
Who knows on whom fortune would then have
But if your father had been victor there,
He ne'er had borne it out of Coventry;
For all the country in a general voice
Cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and
Were set on Hereford, whom they doted on
And blessed and graced, indeed more than the
King.
But this is mere digression from my purpose.
Here come I from our princely general
To know your griefs, to tell you from his Grace
That he will give you audience; and wherein
It shall appear that your demands are just,
You shall enjoy them, everything set off
That might so much as think you enemies.
But he hath forced us to compel this offer,
And it proceeds from policy, not love.
Mowbray, you overween to take it so.
This offer comes from mercy, not from fear.
For, lo, within a ken our army lies,
Upon mine honor, all too confident
To give admittance to a thought of fear.
Our battle is more full of names than yours,
Our men more perfect in the use of arms,
Our armor all as strong, our cause the best.
Then reason will our hearts should be as good.
Say you not then our offer is compelled.
Well, by my will, we shall admit no parley.
That argues but the shame of your offense.
Hath the Prince John a full commission,
In very ample virtue of his father,
To hear and absolutely to determine
Of what conditions we shall stand upon?
That is intended in the General's name.
Then take, my Lord of Westmoreland, this schedule,
For this contains our general grievances.
Each several article herein redressed,
All members of our cause, both here and hence
That are insinewed to this action,
Acquitted by a true substantial form
And present execution of our wills
To us and to our purposes confined,
We come within our awful banks again
And knit our powers to the arm of peace.
This will I show the General. Please you, lords,
In sight of both our battles we may meet,
And either end in peace, which God so frame,
Or to the place of difference call the swords
Which must decide it.
There is a thing within my bosom tells me
That no conditions of our peace can stand.
Fear you not that. If we can make our peace
Upon such large terms and so absolute
As our conditions shall consist upon,
Our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.
Yea, but our valuation shall be such
That every slight and false-derived cause,
Yea, every idle, nice, and wanton reason,
Shall to the King taste of this action,
That, were our royal faiths martyrs in love,
We shall be winnowed with so rough a wind
That even our corn shall seem as light as chaff,
And good from bad find no partition.
No, no, my lord. Note this: the King is weary
Of dainty and such picking grievances,
For he hath found to end one doubt by death
Revives two greater in the heirs of life;
And therefore will he wipe his tables clean
And keep no telltale to his memory
That may repeat and history his loss
To new remembrance. For full well he knows
He cannot so precisely weed this land
As his misdoubts present occasion;
His foes are so enrooted with his friends
That, plucking to unfix an enemy,
He doth unfasten so and shake a friend;
So that this land, like an offensive wife
That hath enraged him on to offer strokes,
As he is striking holds his infant up
And hangs resolved correction in the arm
That was upreared to execution.
Besides, the King hath wasted all his rods
On late offenders, that he now doth lack
The very instruments of chastisement,
So that his power, like to a fangless lion,
May offer but not hold.
And therefore be assured, my good Lord Marshal,
If we do now make our atonement well,
Our peace will, like a broken limb united,
Grow stronger for the breaking.
Here is returned my Lord of Westmoreland.
The Prince is here at hand. Pleaseth your Lordship
To meet his Grace just distance 'tween our armies.
Your Grace of York, in God's name then set
Before, and greet his Grace.--My lord, we come.
You are well encountered here, my cousin
Mowbray.--
Good day to you, gentle Lord Archbishop,--
And so to you, Lord Hastings, and to all.--
My Lord of York, it better showed with you
When that your flock, assembled by the bell,
Encircled you to hear with reverence
Your exposition on the holy text
Than now to see you here, an iron man talking,
Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum,
Turning the word to sword, and life to death.
That man that sits within a monarch's heart
And ripens in the sunshine of his favor,
Would he abuse the countenance of the King,
Alack, what mischiefs might he set abroach
In shadow of such greatness! With you, Lord
Bishop,
It is even so. Who hath not heard it spoken
How deep you were within the books of God,
To us the speaker in His parliament,
To us th' imagined voice of God Himself,
The very opener and intelligencer
Between the grace, the sanctities, of heaven,
And our dull workings? O, who shall believe
But you misuse the reverence of your place,
Employ the countenance and grace of heaven
As a false favorite doth his prince's name,
In deeds dishonorable? You have ta'en up,
Under the counterfeited zeal of God,
The subjects of His substitute, my father,
And both against the peace of heaven and him
Have here up-swarmed them.
Lancaster,
But, as I told my Lord of Westmoreland,
The time misordered doth, in common sense,
Crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form
To hold our safety up. I sent your Grace
The parcels and particulars of our grief,
The which hath been with scorn shoved from the
Whereon this Hydra son of war is born,
Whose dangerous eyes may well be charmed asleep
With grant of our most just and right desires,
And true obedience, of this madness cured,
Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.
If not, we ready are to try our fortunes
To the last man.
We have supplies to second our attempt;
If they miscarry, theirs shall second them,
And so success of mischief shall be born,
And heir from heir shall hold his quarrel up
Whiles England shall have generation.
You are too shallow, Hastings, much too shallow
To sound the bottom of the after-times.
Pleaseth your Grace to answer them directly
How far forth you do like their articles.
And swear here by the honor of my blood
My father's purposes have been mistook,
And some about him have too lavishly
Wrested his meaning and authority.
Upon my soul, they shall. If this may please you,
Discharge your powers unto their several counties,
As we will ours, and here, between the armies,
Let's drink together friendly and embrace,
That all their eyes may bear those tokens home
Of our restored love and amity.
And thereupon I drink unto your Grace.
Go, captain, and deliver to the army
This news of peace. Let them have pay, and part.
To you, my noble Lord of Westmoreland.
You would drink freely. But my love to you
Shall show itself more openly hereafter.
Health to my lord and gentle cousin, Mowbray.
You wish me health in very happy season,
For I am on the sudden something ill.
Against ill chances men are ever merry,
But heaviness foreruns the good event.
Therefore be merry, coz, since sudden sorrow
Serves to say thus: "Some good thing comes
Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.
So much the worse if your own rule be true.
The word of peace is rendered. Hark how they
This had been cheerful after victory.
For then both parties nobly are subdued,
And neither party loser.
And let our army be discharged too.
March by us, that we may peruse the men
We should have coped withal.
Hastings,
And ere they be dismissed, let them march by.
Now, cousin, wherefore stands our army still?
The leaders, having charge from you to stand,
Will not go off until they hear you speak.
My lord, our army is dispersed already.
Like youthful steers unyoked, they take their
East, west, north, south, or, like a school broke up,
Each hurries toward his home and sporting-place.
Good tidings, my Lord Hastings, for the which
And you, Lord Archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray,
Of capital treason I attach you both.
Is this proceeding just and honorable?
Will you thus break your faith?
Whereof you did complain, which, by mine honor,
But for you rebels, look to taste the due
Meet for rebellion and such acts as yours.
Most shallowly did you these arms commence,
Fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence.--
Strike up our drums; pursue the scattered stray.
God, and not we, hath safely fought today.--
Some guard these traitors to the block of death,
Treason's true bed and yielder-up of breath.
Europe. My womb, my womb, my womb undoes
The heat is past. Follow no further now.
Call in the powers, good cousin Westmoreland.
Now, Falstaff, where have you been all this while?
When everything is ended, then you come.
These tardy tricks of yours will, on my life,
One time or other break some gallows' back.
And I beseech your Grace let it be booked with the
Therefore let me have right, and let desert mount.
Colevile.
That led me hither. Had they been ruled by me,
You should have won them dearer than you have.
Retreat is made and execution stayed.
Send Colevile with his confederates
To York, to present execution.--
Blunt, lead him hence, and see you guard him sure.
And now dispatch we toward the court, my lords.
Our news shall go before us to his Majesty,
And we with sober speed will follow you.
Fare you well, Falstaff. I, in my condition,
Shall better speak of you than you deserve.
But the sherris warms it and makes it course from
If I had a thousand sons, the first human principle
How now, Bardolph?
Esquire. I have him already temp'ring between my
Clarence, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, and
Attendants.]
Now, lords, if God doth give successful end
To this debate that bleedeth at our doors,
We will our youth lead on to higher fields
And draw no swords but what are sanctified.
Our navy is addressed, our power collected,
Our substitutes in absence well invested,
And everything lies level to our wish.
Only we want a little personal strength;
And pause us till these rebels now afoot
Come underneath the yoke of government.
Both which we doubt not but your Majesty
Shall soon enjoy.
Humphrey, my son of Gloucester, where is the
Prince your brother?
And how accompanied?
Is not his brother Thomas of Clarence with him?
No, my good lord, he is in presence here.
Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence.
How chance thou art not with the Prince thy
He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas.
Thou hast a better place in his affection
Than all thy brothers. Cherish it, my boy,
And noble offices thou mayst effect
Of mediation, after I am dead,
Between his greatness and thy other brethren.
Therefore omit him not, blunt not his love,
Nor lose the good advantage of his grace
By seeming cold or careless of his will.
For he is gracious if he be observed;
He hath a tear for pity, and a hand
Open as day for melting charity;
Yet notwithstanding, being incensed he is flint,
As humorous as winter, and as sudden
As flaws congealed in the spring of day.
His temper therefore must be well observed.
Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
When you perceive his blood inclined to mirth;
But, being moody, give him time and scope
Till that his passions, like a whale on ground,
Confound themselves with working. Learn this,
Thomas,
And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends,
That the united vessel of their blood,
Mingled with venom of suggestion
Shall never leak, though it do work as strong
As aconitum or rash gunpowder.
Why art thou not at Windsor with him, Thomas?
He is not there today; he dines in London.
And how accompanied? Canst thou tell that?
With Poins and other his continual followers.
Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds,
And he, the noble image of my youth,
Is overspread with them; therefore my grief
Stretches itself beyond the hour of death.
The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape,
In forms imaginary, th' unguided days
And rotten times that you shall look upon
When I am sleeping with my ancestors.
For when his headstrong riot hath no curb,
When rage and hot blood are his counsellors,
When means and lavish manners meet together,
Towards fronting peril and opposed decay!
My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite.
The Prince but studies his companions
Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the
Be looked upon and learned; which, once attained,
Your Highness knows, comes to no further use
But to be known and hated. So, like gross terms,
The Prince will, in the perfectness of time,
Cast off his followers, and their memory
Shall as a pattern or a measure live,
By which his Grace must mete the lives of others,
Turning past evils to advantages.
In the dead carrion.
Who's here? Westmoreland?
Health to my sovereign, and new happiness
Added to that that I am to deliver.
Prince John your son doth kiss your Grace's hand.
Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings, and all
Are brought to the correction of your law.
There is not now a rebel's sword unsheathed,
But peace puts forth her olive everywhere.
The manner how this action hath been borne
Here at more leisure may your Highness read
With every course in his particular.
Which ever in the haunch of winter sings
The lifting up of day.
Look, here's more news.
From enemies heavens keep your Majesty,
And when they stand against you, may they fall
As those that I am come to tell you of.
The Earl Northumberland and the Lord Bardolph,
With a great power of English and of Scots,
Are by the shrieve of Yorkshire overthrown.
The manner and true order of the fight
This packet, please it you, contains at large.
And wherefore should these good news make me
Will Fortune never come with both hands full,
But write her fair words still in foulest letters?
She either gives a stomach and no food--
Such are the poor, in health--or else a feast
And takes away the stomach--such are the rich,
That have abundance and enjoy it not.
And now my sight fails, and my brain is giddy.
Comfort, your Majesty.
My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up.
Be patient, princes. You do know these fits
Are with his Highness very ordinary.
Stand from him, give him air. He'll straight be
No, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs.
Th' incessant care and labor of his mind
Hath wrought the mure that should confine it in
So thin that life looks through and will break out.
The people fear me, for they do observe
Unfathered heirs and loathly births of nature.
The seasons change their manners, as the year
Had found some months asleep and leapt them
The river hath thrice flowed, no ebb between,
And the old folk, time's doting chronicles,
Say it did so a little time before
That our great-grandsire, Edward, sicked and died.
Speak lower, princes, for the King recovers.
This apoplexy will certain be his end.
Into some other chamber. Softly, pray.
Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends,
Unless some dull and favorable hand
Will whisper music to my weary spirit.
Call for the music in the other room.
Set me the crown upon my pillow here.
His eye is hollow, and he changes much.
Less noise, less noise.
How now, rain within doors, and none abroad?
How doth the King?
Heard he the good news yet? Tell it him.
He altered much upon the hearing it.
Not so much noise, my lords.--Sweet prince, speak
The King your father is disposed to sleep.
Let us withdraw into the other room.
Will 't please your Grace to go along with us?
No, I will sit and watch here by the King.
Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
Being so troublesome a bedfellow?
That keep'st the ports of slumber open wide
To many a watchful night! Sleep with it now;
Yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet
As he whose brow with homely biggen bound
Snores out the watch of night. O majesty,
When thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost sit
Like a rich armor worn in heat of day,
That scald'st with safety. By his gates of breath
There lies a downy feather which stirs not;
Did he suspire, that light and weightless down
Perforce must move. My gracious lord, my father,
This sleep is sound indeed. This is a sleep
That from this golden rigol hath divorced
So many English kings. Thy due from me
Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood,
Which nature, love, and filial tenderness
Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously.
My due from thee is this imperial crown,
Which, as immediate from thy place and blood,
Derives itself to me.  Lo,
Which God shall guard. And, put the world's whole
Into one giant arm, it shall not force
This lineal honor from me. This from thee
Will I to mine leave, as 'tis left to me.
Clarence!
What would your Majesty? How fares your Grace?
Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?
We left the Prince my brother here, my liege,
Who undertook to sit and watch by you.
The Prince of Wales? Where is he? Let me see him.
He is not here.
This door is open. He is gone this way.
He came not through the chamber where we
Where is the crown? Who took it from my pillow?
When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.
The Prince hath ta'en it hence. Go seek him out.
Is he so hasty that he doth suppose my sleep my
Find him, my Lord of Warwick. Chide him hither.
This part of his conjoins with my disease
And helps to end me. See, sons, what things you
How quickly nature falls into revolt
When gold becomes her object!
For this the foolish overcareful fathers
Have broke their sleep with thoughts,
Their brains with care, their bones with industry.
For this they have engrossed and piled up
The cankered heaps of strange-achieved gold.
For this they have been thoughtful to invest
Their sons with arts and martial exercises--
When, like the bee, tolling from every flower
The virtuous sweets,
Our thighs packed with wax, our mouths with
We bring it to the hive and, like the bees,
Are murdered for our pains. This bitter taste
Yields his engrossments to the ending father.
Now where is he that will not stay so long
Till his friend sickness hath determined me?
My lord, I found the Prince in the next room,
Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks,
With such a deep demeanor in great sorrow
That tyranny, which never quaffed but blood,
Would, by beholding him, have washed his knife
With gentle eyedrops. He is coming hither.
But wherefore did he take away the crown?
Lo where he comes.--Come hither to me, Harry.--
Depart the chamber. Leave us here alone.
Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought.
Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair
That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honors
Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish youth,
Thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm
Stay but a little, for my cloud of dignity
Is held from falling with so weak a wind
That it will quickly drop. My day is dim.
Thou hast stol'n that which after some few hours
Were thine without offense, and at my death
Thou hast sealed up my expectation.
Thy life did manifest thou loved'st me not,
And thou wilt have me die assured of it.
Thou hid'st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts,
Whom thou hast whetted on thy stony heart
To stab at half an hour of my life.
What, canst thou not forbear me half an hour?
Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thyself,
And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear
That thou art crowned, not that I am dead.
Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse
Be drops of balm to sanctify thy head;
Only compound me with forgotten dust.
Give that which gave thee life unto the worms.
Pluck down my officers, break my decrees,
For now a time is come to mock at form.
Harry the Fifth is crowned. Up, vanity,
Down, royal state, all you sage councillors,
And to the English court assemble now,
From every region, apes of idleness.
Now, neighbor confines, purge you of your scum.
Have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance,
Revel the night, rob, murder, and commit
The oldest sins the newest kind of ways?
Be happy, he will trouble you no more.
England shall double gild his treble guilt.
England shall give him office, honor, might,
For the fifth Harry from curbed license plucks
The muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog
Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent.
When that my care could not withhold thy riots,
What wilt thou do when riot is thy care?
Peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants.
The moist impediments unto my speech,
Ere you with grief had spoke and I had heard
The course of it so far. There is your crown,
And He that wears the crown immortally
Long guard it yours.  If I affect it
Than as your honor and as your renown,
Let me no more from this obedience rise,
Which my most inward true and duteous spirit
Teacheth this prostrate and exterior bending.
God witness with me, when I here came in
And found no course of breath within your Majesty,
How cold it struck my heart! If I do feign,
And never live to show th' incredulous world
The noble change that I have purposed.
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
And dead almost, my liege, to think you were,
And thus upbraided it: "The care on thee
Hath fed upon the body of my father;
Therefore thou best of gold art worst of gold.
Other, less fine in carat, is more precious,
Preserving life in med'cine potable;
But thou, most fine, most honored, most renowned,
Hast eat thy bearer up." Thus, my most royal liege,
Accusing it, I put it on my head
To try with it, as with an enemy
That had before my face murdered my father,
The quarrel of a true inheritor.
But if it did infect my blood with joy
Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride,
If any rebel or vain spirit of mine
Did with the least affection of a welcome
Give entertainment to the might of it,
Let God forever keep it from my head
And make me as the poorest vassal is
That doth with awe and terror kneel to it.
God put it in thy mind to take it hence
That thou mightst win the more thy father's love,
Pleading so wisely in excuse of it.
Come hither, Harry, sit thou by my bed
And hear, I think, the very latest counsel
That ever I shall breathe.
God knows, my son,
By what bypaths and indirect crook'd ways
How troublesome it sat upon my head.
To thee it shall descend with better quiet,
Better opinion, better confirmation,
For all the soil of the achievement goes
With me into the earth. It seemed in me
But as an honor snatched with boist'rous hand,
And I had many living to upbraid
My gain of it by their assistances,
Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed,
Wounding supposed peace. All these bold fears
Thou seest with peril I have answered,
For all my reign hath been but as a scene
Acting that argument. And now my death
Changes the mood, for what in me was purchased
Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort.
So thou the garland wear'st successively.
Yet though thou stand'st more sure than I could do,
Thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green,
And all my friends, which thou must make thy
Have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out,
By whose fell working I was first advanced
And by whose power I well might lodge a fear
To be again displaced; which to avoid,
To lead out many to the Holy Land,
Lest rest and lying still might make them look
Too near unto my state. Therefore, my Harry,
Be it thy course to busy giddy minds
With foreign quarrels, that action, hence borne
May waste the memory of the former days.
More would I, but my lungs are wasted so
That strength of speech is utterly denied me.
How I came by the crown, O God forgive,
And grant it may with thee in true peace live.
You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me.
Then plain and right must my possession be,
Which I with more than with a common pain
Look, look, here comes my John of Lancaster.
Health, peace, and happiness to my royal father.
Thou bring'st me happiness and peace, son John,
But health, alack, with youthful wings is flown
From this bare withered trunk. Upon thy sight
My worldly business makes a period.
Where is my Lord of Warwick?
Doth any name particular belong
Unto the lodging where I first did swoon?
Laud be to God! Even there my life must end.
It hath been prophesied to me many years,
Which vainly I supposed the Holy Land.
But bear me to that chamber; there I'll lie.
In that Jerusalem shall Harry die.
Why, Davy!
And again, sir: shall we sow the hade land with
Hinckley Fair?
Davy.
Visor. That Visor is an arrant knave, on my
Come, come, come, off with your boots.--Give me
Bardolph,  and welcome, my tall
Their spirits are so married in conjunction with the
Master Shallow, I would humor his men with the
Prince Harry in continual laughter the wearing out
Shallow.
How now, my Lord Chief Justice, whither away?
Exceeding well. His cares are now all ended.
And to our purposes he lives no more.
The service that I truly did his life
Hath left me open to all injuries.
Indeed, I think the young king loves you not.
To welcome the condition of the time,
Which cannot look more hideously upon me
Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.
Here come the heavy issue of dead Harry.
Of he the worst of these three gentlemen!
How many nobles then should hold their places
That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!
Good morrow, cousin Warwick, good morrow.
We meet like men that had forgot to speak.
We do remember, but our argument
Is all too heavy to admit much talk.
Well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy.
Peace be with us, lest we be heavier.
And I dare swear you borrow not that face
Of seeming sorrow; it is sure your own.
Though no man be assured what grace to find,
You stand in coldest expectation.
Well, you must now speak Sir John Falstaff fair,
Which swims against your stream of quality.
Sweet princes, what I did I did in honor,
Led by th' impartial conduct of my soul;
And never shall you see that I will beg
If truth and upright innocency fail me,
And tell him who hath sent me after him.
Good morrow, and God save your Majesty.
This new and gorgeous garment majesty
Sits not so easy on me as you think.--
Brothers, you mix your sadness with some fear.
This is the English, not the Turkish court;
Not Amurath an Amurath succeeds,
But Harry Harry. Yet be sad, good brothers,
For, by my faith, it very well becomes you.
Sorrow so royally in you appears
That I will deeply put the fashion on
And wear it in my heart. Why then, be sad.
But entertain no more of it, good brothers,
Than a joint burden laid upon us all.
For me, by heaven, I bid you be assured,
Let me but bear your love, I'll bear your cares.
Yet weep that Harry's dead, and so will I,
But Harry lives that shall convert those tears
By number into hours of happiness.
We hope no otherwise from your Majesty.
You all look strangely on me. 
And you most.
You are, I think, assured I love you not.
Your Majesty hath no just cause to hate me.
No? How might a prince of my great hopes forget
So great indignities you laid upon me?
What, rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison
Th' immediate heir of England? Was this easy?
May this be washed in Lethe and forgotten?
The image of his power lay then in me.
And in th' administration of his law,
Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth,
Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
The majesty and power of law and justice,
The image of the King whom I presented,
And struck me in my very seat of judgment,
Whereon, as an offender to your father,
And did commit you. If the deed were ill,
Be you contented, wearing now the garland,
To have a son set your decrees at nought?
To pluck down justice from your awful bench?
To trip the course of law and blunt the sword
That guards the peace and safety of your person?
Nay more, to spurn at your most royal image
And mock your workings in a second body?
Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours;
Be now the father and propose a son,
Hear your own dignity so much profaned,
See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted,
Behold yourself so by a son disdained,
And then imagine me taking your part
And in your power soft silencing your son.
After this cold considerance, sentence me,
And, as you are a king, speak in your state
What I have done that misbecame my place,
My person, or my liege's sovereignty.
You are right, justice, and you weigh this well.
Therefore still bear the balance and the sword.
And I do wish your honors may increase
Till you do live to see a son of mine
Offend you and obey you as I did.
So shall I live to speak my father's words:
That dares do justice on my proper son;
And not less happy, having such a son
That would deliver up his greatness so
Into the hands of justice." You did commit me,
For which I do commit into your hand
Th' unstained sword that you have used to bear,
With this remembrance: that you use the same
With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit
As you have done 'gainst me. There is my hand.
You shall be as a father to my youth,
My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear,
And I will stoop and humble my intents
To your well-practiced wise directions.--
And, princes all, believe me, I beseech you:
My father is gone wild into his grave,
For in his tomb lie my affections,
And with his spirits sadly I survive
To mock the expectation of the world,
To frustrate prophecies, and to raze out
Rotten opinion, who hath writ me down
After my seeming. The tide of blood in me
Hath proudly flowed in vanity till now.
Now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea,
Where it shall mingle with the state of floods
And flow henceforth in formal majesty.
Now call we our high court of parliament,
And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel
That the great body of our state may go
In equal rank with the best-governed nation;
That war, or peace, or both at once, may be
As things acquainted and familiar to us,
Our coronation done, we will accite,
As I before remembered, all our state.
And, God consigning to my good intents,
No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say
God shorten Harry's happy life one day.
Bardolph, and Page.]
Come, cousin Silence.--And then to bed.
Welcome, my little tiny thief, and welcome indeed
Is 't not so?
How now, Pistol?
Sweet knight, thou art now one of the greatest men
Barson.
Puff in thy teeth, most recreant coward base!--
Sir John, I am thy Pistol and thy friend,
And helter-skelter have I rode to thee,
And tidings do I bring, and lucky joys,
And golden times, and happy news of price.
Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof.
Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons,
And shall good news be baffled?
Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies' lap.
Under which king, besonian? Speak or die.
Under King Harry.
Harry the Fourth.
Sir John, thy tender lambkin now is king.
Harry the Fifth's the man. I speak the truth.
When Pistol lies, do this and fig me, like
The bragging Spaniard.	
As nail in door. The things I speak are just.
Master Robert Shallow, choose what office thou
Fortune's steward. Get on thy boots. We'll ride all
Pistol, utter more to me, and withal devise something
Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also!
Why, here it is. Welcome these pleasant days.
Pistol beat amongst you.
Bardolph, and the Page.]
This doth infer the zeal I had to see him.
Rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell Alecto's
There roared the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.
God save thy Grace, King Hal, my royal Hal.
The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal
My Lord Chief Justice, speak to that vain man.
Have you your wits? Know you what 'tis you
My king, my Jove, I speak to thee, my heart!
How ill white hairs becomes a fool and jester.
So surfeit-swelled, so old, and so profane;
But being awaked, I do despise my dream.
Make less thy body hence, and more thy grace;
Leave gormandizing. Know the grave doth gape
For thee thrice wider than for other men.
Reply not to me with a fool-born jest.
Presume not that I am the thing I was,
For God doth know--so shall the world perceive--
That I have turned away my former self.
So will I those that kept me company.
When thou dost hear I am as I have been,
Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou wast,
The tutor and the feeder of my riots.
Till then I banish thee, on pain of death,
As I have done the rest of my misleaders,
Not to come near our person by ten mile.
For competence of life I will allow you,
That lack of means enforce you not to evils.
And, as we hear you do reform yourselves,
We will, according to your strengths and qualities,
Give you advancement. 
Be it your charge, my lord,
To see performed the tenor of my word.--
Set on.
Fear not your advancements. I will be the man yet
Come, lieutenant Pistol.--Come, Bardolph.--I
Officers.]
Go, carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet.
Take all his company along with him.
Take them away.
Chief Justice exit.]
He hath intent his wonted followers
Shall all be very well provided for,
But all are banished till their conversations
Appear more wise and modest to the world.
The King hath called his parliament, my lord.
We bear our civil swords and native fire
As far as France. I heard a bird so sing,
Whose music, to my thinking, pleased the King.
Come, will you hence?
Queen.
But a good conscience will make any possible
Oldcastle died a martyr, and this is not the man.
My tongue is weary; when my legs are too, I will bid
Merchant of Syracuse, Jailer, and other Attendants.]
Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall,
And by the doom of death end woes and all.
Merchant of Syracusa, plead no more.
The enmity and discord which of late
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke
To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen,
Who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives,
Have sealed his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
Excludes all pity from our threat'ning looks.
For since the mortal and intestine jars
It hath in solemn synods been decreed,
Both by the Syracusians and ourselves,
To admit no traffic to our adverse towns.
Nay, more, if any born at Ephesus
Be seen at Syracusian marts and fairs;
Again, if any Syracusian born
Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies,
His goods confiscate to the Duke's dispose,
Unless a thousand marks be levied
To quit the penalty and to ransom him.
Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
Cannot amount unto a hundred marks;
Therefore by law thou art condemned to die.
Yet this my comfort: when your words are done,
My woes end likewise with the evening sun.
Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause
Why thou departedst from thy native home
And for what cause thou cam'st to Ephesus.
Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable;
Yet, that the world may witness that my end
Was wrought by nature, not by vile offense,
In Syracusa was I born, and wed
Unto a woman happy but for me,
And by me, had not our hap been bad.
With her I lived in joy. Our wealth increased
By prosperous voyages I often made
To Epidamium, till my factor's death
And the great care of goods at random left
Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse;
From whom my absence was not six months old
Before herself--almost at fainting under
The pleasing punishment that women bear--
Had made provision for her following me
And soon and safe arrived where I was.
There had she not been long but she became
And, which was strange, the one so like the other
As could not be distinguished but by names.
That very hour, and in the selfsame inn,
Of such a burden, male twins, both alike.
Those, for their parents were exceeding poor,
My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys,
Made daily motions for our home return.
Unwilling, I agreed. Alas, too soon
We came aboard.
Before the always-wind-obeying deep
Gave any tragic instance of our harm;
But longer did we not retain much hope,
For what obscured light the heavens did grant
Did but convey unto our fearful minds
Which though myself would gladly have embraced,
Yet the incessant weepings of my wife,
Weeping before for what she saw must come,
And piteous plainings of the pretty babes,
That mourned for fashion, ignorant what to fear,
Forced me to seek delays for them and me.
And this it was, for other means was none:
The sailors sought for safety by our boat
And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us.
My wife, more careful for the latter-born,
Had fastened him unto a small spare mast,
Such as seafaring men provide for storms.
To him one of the other twins was bound,
Whilst I had been like heedful of the other.
The children thus disposed, my wife and I,
Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixed,
Fastened ourselves at either end the mast
And, floating straight, obedient to the stream,
Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought.
At length the sun, gazing upon the earth,
Dispersed those vapors that offended us,
And by the benefit of his wished light
The seas waxed calm, and we discovered
Two ships from far, making amain to us,
Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this.
But ere they came--O, let me say no more!
Gather the sequel by that went before.
Nay, forward, old man. Do not break off so,
For we may pity though not pardon thee.
Worthily termed them merciless to us.
For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,
We were encountered by a mighty rock,
Which being violently borne upon,
Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst;
So that, in this unjust divorce of us,
Fortune had left to both of us alike
What to delight in, what to sorrow for.
Her part, poor soul, seeming as burdened
With lesser weight, but not with lesser woe,
Was carried with more speed before the wind,
And in our sight they three were taken up
By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.
At length, another ship had seized on us
And, knowing whom it was their hap to save,
Gave healthful welcome to their shipwracked guests,
And would have reft the fishers of their prey
Had not their bark been very slow of sail;
And therefore homeward did they bend their course.
Thus have you heard me severed from my bliss,
That by misfortunes was my life prolonged
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.
And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for,
Do me the favor to dilate at full
What have befall'n of them and thee till now.
My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,
At eighteen years became inquisitive
After his brother, and importuned me
That his attendant--so his case was like,
Reft of his brother, but retained his name--
Might bear him company in the quest of him,
Whom whilst I labored of a love to see,
Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece,
Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,
And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus,
Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought
Or that or any place that harbors men.
But here must end the story of my life;
And happy were I in my timely death
Could all my travels warrant me they live.
Hapless Egeon, whom the fates have marked
To bear the extremity of dire mishap,
Now, trust me, were it not against our laws,
Against my crown, my oath, my dignity,
Which princes, would they, may not disannul,
My soul should sue as advocate for thee.
But though thou art adjudged to the death,
And passed sentence may not be recalled
But to our honor's great disparagement,
Yet will I favor thee in what I can.
Therefore, merchant, I'll limit thee this day
To seek thy life by beneficial help.
Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus;
Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
And live. If no, then thou art doomed to die.--
Jailer, take him to thy custody.
Hopeless and helpless doth Egeon wend,
But to procrastinate his lifeless end.
Dromio of Syracuse.]
Therefore give out you are of Epidamium,
Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate.
This very day a Syracusian merchant
Is apprehended for arrival here
And, not being able to buy out his life,
According to the statute of the town
Dies ere the weary sun set in the west.
There is your money that I had to keep.
Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host,
And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee.
Within this hour it will be dinnertime.
Till that, I'll view the manners of the town,
Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
And then return and sleep within mine inn,
For with long travel I am stiff and weary.
Get thee away.
Many a man would take you at your word
And go indeed, having so good a mean.
When I am dull with care and melancholy,
Lightens my humor with his merry jests.
What, will you walk with me about the town
And then go to my inn and dine with me?
Of whom I hope to make much benefit.
Please you, I'll meet with you upon the mart
And afterward consort you till bedtime.
My present business calls me from you now.
Farewell till then. I will go lose myself
And wander up and down to view the city.
Sir, I commend you to your own content.	
He that commends me to mine own content
Commends me to the thing I cannot get.
That in the ocean seeks another drop,
Who, falling there to find his fellow forth,
Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself.
So I, to find a mother and a brother,
In quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.
Here comes the almanac of my true date.--
What now? How chance thou art returned so soon?
Returned so soon? Rather approached too late!
The capon burns; the pig falls from the spit;
The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell;
My mistress made it one upon my cheek.
She is so hot because the meat is cold;
The meat is cold because you come not home;
You come not home because you have no stomach;
You have no stomach, having broke your fast.
But we that know what 'tis to fast and pray
Are penitent for your default today.
Stop in your wind, sir. Tell me this, I pray:
Where have you left the money that I gave you?
To pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper?
The saddler had it, sir; I kept it not.
Tell me, and dally not: where is the money?
We being strangers here, how dar'st thou trust
So great a charge from thine own custody?
If I return, I shall be post indeed,
For she will scour your fault upon my pate.
Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your
And strike you home without a messenger.
Come, Dromio, come, these jests are out of season.
Reserve them till a merrier hour than this.
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?
To me, sir? Why, you gave no gold to me!
Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness,
And tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge.
My charge was but to fetch you from the mart
Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner.
My mistress and her sister stays for you.
Now, as I am a Christian, answer me
In what safe place you have bestowed my money,
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours
That stands on tricks when I am undisposed.
Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?
Some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders,
But not a thousand marks between you both.
If I should pay your Worship those again,
Perchance you will not bear them patiently.
Thy mistress' marks? What mistress, slave, hast
Your Worship's wife, my mistress at the Phoenix,
She that doth fast till you come home to dinner
And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.
What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face,
Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave.
What mean you, sir? For God's sake, hold your
Nay, an you will not, sir, I'll take my heels.
Upon my life, by some device or other
The villain is o'erraught of all my money.
They say this town is full of cozenage,
As nimble jugglers that deceive the eye,
Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind,
Soul-killing witches that deform the body,
Disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks,
And many suchlike liberties of sin.
If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner.
Luciana, her sister.]
Neither my husband nor the slave returned
That in such haste I sent to seek his master?
Sure, Luciana, it is two o'clock.
Perhaps some merchant hath invited him,
And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner.
Good sister, let us dine, and never fret.
Time is their master, and when they see time
They'll go or come. If so, be patient, sister.
Why should their liberty than ours be more?
Because their business still lies out o' door.
Look when I serve him so, he takes it ill.
There's none but asses will be bridled so.
Why, headstrong liberty is lashed with woe.
There's nothing situate under heaven's eye
But hath his bound in earth, in sea, in sky.
The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls
Are their males' subjects and at their controls.
Man, more divine, the master of all these,
Lord of the wide world and wild wat'ry seas,
Endued with intellectual sense and souls,
Of more preeminence than fish and fowls,
Are masters to their females, and their lords.
Then let your will attend on their accords.
This servitude makes you to keep unwed.
Not this, but troubles of the marriage bed.
But, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.
Ere I learn love, I'll practice to obey.
How if your husband start some otherwhere?
Till he come home again, I would forbear.
Patience unmoved! No marvel though she pause;
They can be meek that have no other cause.
We bid be quiet when we hear it cry,
But were we burdened with like weight of pain,
As much or more we should ourselves complain.
So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee,
With urging helpless patience would relieve me;
But if thou live to see like right bereft,
This fool-begged patience in thee will be left.
Well, I will marry one day, but to try.
Here comes your man. Now is your husband nigh.
Say, is your tardy master now at hand?
Say, didst thou speak with him? Know'st thou his
Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear.
Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.
But say, I prithee, is he coming home?
It seems he hath great care to please his wife.
Why, mistress, sure my master is horn mad.
Horn mad, thou villain?
But sure he is stark mad.
When I desired him to come home to dinner,
He asked me for a thousand marks in gold.
So that my errand, due unto my tongue,
For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.
Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.
Go back again and be new beaten home?
For God's sake, send some other messenger.
Back, slave, or I will break thy pate across.
And he will bless that cross with other beating.
Between you, I shall have a holy head.
Hence, prating peasant. Fetch thy master home.
Am I so round with you as you with me,
That like a football you do spurn me thus?
You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither.
If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.
Fie, how impatience loureth in your face.
His company must do his minions grace,
Whilst I at home starve for a merry look.
Hath homely age th' alluring beauty took
From my poor cheek? Then he hath wasted it.
Are my discourses dull? Barren my wit?
If voluble and sharp discourse be marred,
Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard.
Do their gay vestments his affections bait?
That's not my fault; he's master of my state.
What ruins are in me that can be found
By him not ruined? Then is he the ground
Of my defeatures. My decayed fair
But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale
And feeds from home. Poor I am but his stale.
Self-harming jealousy, fie, beat it hence.
Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense.
Or else what lets it but he would be here?
Sister, you know he promised me a chain.
Would that alone o' love he would detain,
So he would keep fair quarter with his bed.
Will lose his beauty. Yet the gold bides still
That others touch, and often touching will
Wear gold; yet no man that hath a name
By falsehood and corruption doth it shame.
Since that my beauty cannot please his eye,
How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!
The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up
Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave
Is wandered forth in care to seek me out.
By computation and mine host's report,
How now, sir? Is your merry humor altered?
As you love strokes, so jest with me again.
You know no Centaur? You received no gold?
Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner?
My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad,
That thus so madly thou didst answer me?
What answer, sir? When spake I such a word?
Even now, even here, not half an hour since.
Home to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.
Villain, thou didst deny the gold's receipt
And told'st me of a mistress and a dinner,
For which I hope thou felt'st I was displeased.
What means this jest, I pray you, master, tell me?
Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth?
Think'st thou I jest? Hold, take thou that and that.
Hold, sir, for God's sake! Now your jest is earnest.
Upon what bargain do you give it me?
Because that I familiarly sometimes
Do use you for my fool and chat with you,
Your sauciness will jest upon my love
And make a common of my serious hours.
When the sun shines, let foolish gnats make sport,
But creep in crannies when he hides his beams.
If you will jest with me, know my aspect,
And fashion your demeanor to my looks,
Or I will beat this method in your sconce.
Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,
When in the "why" and the "wherefore" is neither
Well, sir, I thank you.
Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown.
Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects.
The time was once when thou unurged wouldst vow
That never words were music to thine ear,
That never object pleasing in thine eye,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
That never meat sweet-savored in thy taste,
Unless I spake, or looked, or touched, or carved to
How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it
That thou art then estranged from thyself?
That, undividable, incorporate,
Am better than thy dear self's better part.
Ah, do not tear away thyself from me!
For know, my love, as easy mayst thou fall
And take unmingled thence that drop again
Without addition or diminishing,
As take from me thyself and not me too.
How dearly would it touch thee to the quick,
Shouldst thou but hear I were licentious
And that this body, consecrate to thee,
By ruffian lust should be contaminate!
Wouldst thou not spit at me, and spurn at me,
And hurl the name of husband in my face,
And tear the stained skin off my harlot brow,
And from my false hand cut the wedding ring,
And break it with a deep-divorcing vow?
My blood is mingled with the crime of lust;
For if we two be one, and thou play false,
Being strumpeted by thy contagion.
Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed,
Plead you to me, fair dame? I know you not.
In Ephesus I am but two hours old,
As strange unto your town as to your talk,
Who, every word by all my wit being scanned,
Wants wit in all one word to understand.
Fie, brother, how the world is changed with you!
When were you wont to use my sister thus?
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.
By thee; and this thou didst return from him:
That he did buffet thee and, in his blows,
Denied my house for his, me for his wife.
Did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman?
What is the course and drift of your compact?
Villain, thou liest, for even her very words
Didst thou deliver to me on the mart.
How can she thus then call us by our names--
Unless it be by inspiration?
How ill agrees it with your gravity
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,
Abetting him to thwart me in my mood.
Be it my wrong you are from me exempt,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.
Come, I will fasten on this sleeve of thine.
Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine,
Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state,
Makes me with thy strength to communicate.
If aught possess thee from me, it is dross,
Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss,
Who, all for want of pruning, with intrusion
Infect thy sap and live on thy confusion.
To me she speaks; she moves me for her theme.
What, was I married to her in my dream?
Or sleep I now and think I hear all this?
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss?
Until I know this sure uncertainty
Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.
This is the fairy land. O spite of spites!
We talk with goblins, owls, and sprites.
If we obey them not, this will ensue:
They'll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.
Why prat'st thou to thyself and answer'st not?
Dromio--thou, Dromio--thou snail, thou slug,
Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.
Thou hast thine own form.
If thou art changed to aught, 'tis to an ass.
But I should know her as well as she knows me.
Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,
To put the finger in the eye and weep
Whilst man and master laughs my woes to scorn.
Come, sir, to dinner.--Dromio, keep the gate.--
Husband, I'll dine above with you today,
And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks.
Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.--
Come, sister.--Dromio, play the porter well.
Am I in Earth, in heaven, or in hell?
Sleeping or waking, mad or well-advised?
Known unto these, and to myself disguised!
And in this mist at all adventures go.
Master, shall I be porter at the gate?
Ay, and let none enter, lest I break your pate.
Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late.
Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all;
My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours.
Say that I lingered with you at your shop
To see the making of her carcanet,
And that tomorrow you will bring it home.
But here's a villain that would face me down
He met me on the mart, and that I beat him
And charged him with a thousand marks in gold,
And that I did deny my wife and house.--
Thou drunkard, thou, what didst thou mean by this?
Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know.
That you beat me at the mart I have your hand to
If the skin were parchment and the blows you gave
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.
By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear.
You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.
You're sad, Signior Balthasar. Pray God our cheer
May answer my goodwill and your good welcome
Good meat, sir, is common; that every churl affords.
And welcome more common, for that's nothing but
Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry
Ay, to a niggardly host and more sparing guest.
But though my cates be mean, take them in good
Better cheer may you have, but not with better
But soft! My door is locked.  Go, bid
Maud, Bridget, Marian, Ciceley, Gillian, Ginn!
Mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb, idiot, patch!
Either get thee from the door or sit down at the
Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call'st for
When one is one too many? Go, get thee from the
What patch is made our porter? My master stays in
Let him walk from whence he came, lest he catch
Who talks within there? Ho, open the door.
Right, sir, I'll tell you when an you'll tell me
Wherefore? For my dinner. I have not dined today.
Nor today here you must not. Come again when you
What art thou that keep'st me out from the house I
The porter for this time, sir, and my name is
Dromio.
The one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle
If thou hadst been Dromio today in my place,
Thou wouldst have changed thy face for a name, or
What a coil is there, Dromio! Who are those at the
Let my master in, Luce.
And so tell your master.
Have at you with a proverb: shall I set in my staff?
Have at you with another: that's--When, can you
If thy name be called "Luce," Luce, thou hast
Do you hear, you minion? You'll let us in, I hope?
So, come help. Well struck! There was blow for
Thou baggage, let me in.
Master, knock the door hard.
You'll cry for this, minion, if I beat the door down.
What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the
Who is that at the door that keeps all this noise?
By my troth, your town is troubled with unruly
Are you there, wife? You might have come before.
Your wife, sir knave? Go, get you from the door.
If you went in pain, master, this knave would go
Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome. We would
In debating which was best, we shall part with
They stand at the door, master. Bid them welcome
There is something in the wind, that we cannot get
You would say so, master, if your garments were
Your cake here is warm within; you stand here in
It would make a man mad as a buck to be so
Go, fetch me something. I'll break ope the gate.
Break any breaking here, and I'll break your knave's
Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not
It seems thou want'st breaking. Out upon thee, hind!
Here's too much "Out upon thee!" I pray thee, let
Ay, when fowls have no feathers and fish have no
Well, I'll break in. Go, borrow me a crow.
For a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a
If a crow help us in, sirrah, we'll pluck a crow
Go, get thee gone. Fetch me an iron crow.
Have patience, sir. O, let it not be so.
Herein you war against your reputation,
And draw within the compass of suspect
Th' unviolated honor of your wife.
Once this: your long experience of her wisdom,
Her sober virtue, years, and modesty
Plead on her part some cause to you unknown.
And doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse
Why at this time the doors are made against you.
Be ruled by me; depart in patience,
And let us to the Tiger all to dinner,
And about evening come yourself alone
To know the reason of this strange restraint.
If by strong hand you offer to break in
Now in the stirring passage of the day,
And that supposed by the common rout
Against your yet ungalled estimation
That may with foul intrusion enter in
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead;
For slander lives upon succession,
Forever housed where it gets possession.
You have prevailed. I will depart in quiet
And, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry.
Pretty and witty, wild and yet, too, gentle.
There will we dine. This woman that I mean,
My wife--but, I protest, without desert--
Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal;
To her will we to dinner.  Get you home
And fetch the chain; by this, I know, 'tis made.
Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine,
For there's the house. That chain will I bestow--
Be it for nothing but to spite my wife--
Upon mine hostess there. Good sir, make haste.
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me,
Do so. This jest shall cost me some expense.
And may it be that you have quite forgot
Even in the spring of love thy love-springs rot?
If you did wed my sister for her wealth,
Or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth --
Let not my sister read it in your eye;
Look sweet, speak fair, become disloyalty;
Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted.
Be secret-false. What need she be acquainted?
Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed;
Alas, poor women, make us but believe,
Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve;
Then, gentle brother, get you in again.
Sweet mistress--what your name is else I know not,
Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not
Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak.
Smothered in errors, feeble, shallow, weak,
Against my soul's pure truth why labor you
Are you a god? Would you create me new?
But if that I am I, then well I know
Nor to her bed no homage do I owe.
Sing, Siren, for thyself, and I will dote.
And as a bed I'll take them and there lie,
He gains by death that hath such means to die.
What, are you mad that you do reason so?
Not mad, but mated--how, I do not know.
It is a fault that springeth from your eye.
For gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.
Gaze when you should, and that will clear your
As good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.
Why call you me "love"? Call my sister so.
Thy sister's sister.
It is thyself, mine own self's better part,
Mine eye's clear eye, my dear heart's dearer heart,
My food, my fortune, and my sweet hope's aim,
My sole Earth's heaven, and my heaven's claim.
All this my sister is, or else should be.
Call thyself "sister," sweet, for I am thee.
Thee will I love, and with thee lead my life;
Thou hast no husband yet, nor I no wife.
Give me thy hand.
Where runn'st thou so fast?
Dromio? Am I your man? Am I myself?
Spain, who sent whole armadas of carracks to be
Netherlands?
And, I think, if my breast had not been made of
She had transformed me to a curtal dog and made
Go, hie thee presently. Post to the road.
An if the wind blow any way from shore,
If any bark put forth, come to the mart,
Where I will walk till thou return to me.
If everyone knows us, and we know none,
As from a bear a man would run for life,
So fly I from her that would be my wife.	
There's none but witches do inhabit here,
And therefore 'tis high time that I were hence.
She that doth call me husband, even my soul
Doth for a wife abhor. But her fair sister,
Possessed with such a gentle sovereign grace,
Of such enchanting presence and discourse,
Hath almost made me traitor to myself.
But lest myself be guilty to self wrong,
Master Antipholus.
The chain unfinished made me stay thus long.
What is your will that I shall do with this?
What please yourself, sir. I have made it for you.
Made it for me, sir? I bespoke it not.
Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have.
Go home with it, and please your wife withal,
And soon at supper time I'll visit you
And then receive my money for the chain.
For fear you ne'er see chain nor money more.
You are a merry man, sir. Fare you well.	
What I should think of this I cannot tell,
But this I think: there's no man is so vain
That would refuse so fair an offered chain.
When in the streets he meets such golden gifts.
If any ship put out, then straight away.
You know since Pentecost the sum is due,
And since I have not much importuned you,
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
To Persia and want guilders for my voyage.
Therefore make present satisfaction,
Or I'll attach you by this officer.
Even just the sum that I do owe to you
Is growing to me by Antipholus.
And in the instant that I met with you,
He had of me a chain. At five o'clock
Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house,
Ephesus from the Courtesan's.]
That labor may you save. See where he comes.
While I go to the goldsmith's house, go thou
And buy a rope's end. That will I bestow
Among my wife and her confederates
For locking me out of my doors by day.
But soft. I see the goldsmith. Get thee gone.
Buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me.
But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.
Belike you thought our love would last too long
If it were chained together, and therefore came not.
Saving your merry humor, here's the note
How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
The fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion,
Which doth amount to three-odd ducats more
Than I stand debted to this gentleman.
For he is bound to sea, and stays but for it.
Besides, I have some business in the town.
Good signior, take the stranger to my house,
And with you take the chain, and bid my wife
Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof.
Perchance I will be there as soon as you.
Then you will bring the chain to her yourself.
No, bear it with you lest I come not time enough.
Well, sir, I will. Have you the chain about you?
An if I have not, sir, I hope you have,
Or else you may return without your money.
Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain.
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,
And I, to blame, have held him here too long.
Good Lord! You use this dalliance to excuse
Your breach of promise to the Porpentine.
But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.
The hour steals on. I pray you, sir, dispatch.
You hear how he importunes me. The chain!
Why, give it to my wife, and fetch your money.
Come, come. You know I gave it you even now.
Either send the chain, or send by me some token.
Fie, now you run this humor out of breath.
Come, where's the chain? I pray you, let me see it.
My business cannot brook this dalliance.
Good sir, say whe'er you'll answer me or no.
If not, I'll leave him to the Officer.
The money that you owe me for the chain.
You know I gave it you half an hour since.
You gave me none. You wrong me much to say so.
You wrong me more, sir, in denying it.
Consider how it stands upon my credit.
Well, officer, arrest him at my suit.
This touches me in reputation.
Either consent to pay this sum for me,
Or I attach you by this officer.
Consent to pay thee that I never had?--
Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou dar'st.
Here is thy fee. Arrest him, officer.	
If he should scorn me so apparently.
As all the metal in your shop will answer.
Sir, sir, I shall have law in Ephesus,
To your notorious shame, I doubt it not.
Master, there's a bark of Epidamium
That stays but till her owner comes aboard,
And then, sir, she bears away. Our fraughtage, sir,
The oil, the balsamum, and aqua vitae.
The ship is in her trim; the merry wind
Blows fair from land. They stay for naught at all
But for their owner, master, and yourself.
How now? A madman? Why, thou peevish sheep,
What ship of Epidamium stays for me?
Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope
And told thee to what purpose and what end.
You sent me for a rope's end as soon.
You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.
And teach your ears to list me with more heed.
To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight.
Give her this key, and tell her in the desk
That's covered o'er with Turkish tapestry
There is a purse of ducats. Let her send it.
Tell her I am arrested in the street,
And that shall bail me. Hie thee, slave. Begone.--
On, officer, to prison till it come.
To Adriana. That is where we dined,
Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband.
She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.
Thither I must, although against my will,
For servants must their masters' minds fulfill.
Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so?
That he did plead in earnest, yea or no?
What observation mad'st thou in this case
Of his heart's meteors tilting in his face?
First he denied you had in him no right.
He meant he did me none; the more my spite.
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.
And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.
Then pleaded I for you.
That love I begged for you he begged of me.
With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?
With words that in an honest suit might move.
First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.
Did'st speak him fair?
My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.
He is deformed, crooked, old, and sere,
Ill-faced, worse-bodied, shapeless everywhere,
Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind,
Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.
Who would be jealous, then, of such a one?
No evil lost is wailed when it is gone.
Ah, but I think him better than I say,
Far from her nest the lapwing cries away.
Here, go--the desk, the purse! Sweet, now make
How hast thou lost thy breath?
Where is thy master, Dromio? Is he well?
No, he's in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.
One whose hard heart is buttoned up with steel;
The passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands;
One that before the judgment carries poor souls to
What, is he arrested? Tell me at whose suit.
But is in a suit of buff which 'rested him; that can I
Will you send him, mistress, redemption--the
Go fetch it, sister.  This I wonder at,
That he, unknown to me, should be in debt.
Tell me, was he arrested on a band?
Not on a band, but on a stronger thing:
No, no, the bell. 'Tis time that I were gone.
It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes
The hours come back. That did I never hear.
As if time were in debt. How fondly dost thou
Time is a very bankrout and owes more than he's
Nay, he's a thief too. Have you not heard men say
That time comes stealing on by night and day?
If he be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the
Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?
Go, Dromio. There's the money. Bear it straight,
And bring thy master home immediately.
Come, sister, I am pressed down with conceit:
Conceit, my comfort and my injury.
There's not a man I meet but doth salute me
As if I were their well-acquainted friend,
And everyone doth call me by my name.
Some tender money to me; some invite me;
Some other give me thanks for kindnesses;
Some offer me commodities to buy.
Even now a tailor called me in his shop
And showed me silks that he had bought for me,
And therewithal took measure of my body.
Sure these are but imaginary wiles,
And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.
What gold is this? What Adam dost thou mean?
Paradise, but that Adam that keeps the prison; he
Prodigal; he that came behind you, sir, like an evil
The fellow is distract, and so am I,
And here we wander in illusions.
Some blessed power deliver us from hence!
Well met, well met, Master Antipholus.
Is that the chain you promised me today?
Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.
Master, is this Mistress Satan?
Come not near her.
Your man and you are marvelous merry, sir.
Will you go with me? We'll mend our dinner here.
Avoid then, fiend! What tell'st thou me of supping?
Thou art, as you are all, a sorceress.
Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner
Or, for my diamond, the chain you promised,
And I'll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Avaunt, thou witch!--Come, Dromio, let us go.
Mistress, that you know.
Now, out of doubt Antipholus is mad;
Else would he never so demean himself.
And for the same he promised me a chain.
Both one and other he denies me now.
The reason that I gather he is mad,
Besides this present instance of his rage,
Is a mad tale he told today at dinner
Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.
Belike his wife, acquainted with his fits,
On purpose shut the doors against his way.
My way is now to hie home to his house
And tell his wife that, being lunatic,
He rushed into my house and took perforce
My ring away. This course I fittest choose,
For forty ducats is too much to lose.
Fear me not, man. I will not break away.
To warrant thee, as I am 'rested for.
My wife is in a wayward mood today
And will not lightly trust the messenger
That I should be attached in Ephesus.
Here comes my man. I think he brings the
How now, sir? Have you that I sent you for?
Here's that, I warrant you, will pay them all.
Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.
Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?
And to that end, sir, I will welcome you.
When I am cold, he heats me with beating; when I
Come, go along. My wife is coming yonder.
How say you now? Is not your husband mad?
His incivility confirms no less.--
Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer;
Establish him in his true sense again,
And I will please you what you will demand.
Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!
Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy.
Give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse.
There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.
To yield possession to my holy prayers,
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight.
Peace, doting wizard, peace. I am not mad.
You minion, you, are these your customers?
Did this companion with the saffron face
Revel and feast it at my house today
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut
And I denied to enter in my house?
Where would you had remained until this time,
Free from these slanders and this open shame.
Sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.
Were not my doors locked up and I shut out?
Perdie, your doors were locked, and you shut out.
And did not she herself revile me there?
Sans fable, she herself reviled you there.
Did not her kitchen maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
Certes, she did; the kitchen vestal scorned you.
And did not I in rage depart from thence?
In verity you did.--My bones bears witness,
That since have felt the vigor of his rage.
Is 't good to soothe him in these contraries?
It is no shame. The fellow finds his vein
And, yielding to him, humors well his frenzy.
Thou hast suborned the goldsmith to arrest me.
Alas, I sent you money to redeem you
By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.
Money by me? Heart and goodwill you might,
But surely, master, not a rag of money.
Went'st not thou to her for a purse of ducats?
He came to me, and I delivered it.
And I am witness with her that she did.
God and the rope-maker bear me witness
That I was sent for nothing but a rope.
Mistress, both man and master is possessed.
They must be bound and laid in some dark room.
Say wherefore didst thou lock me forth today.
And, gentle master, I received no gold.
But I confess, sir, that we were locked out.
Dissembling villain, thou speak'st false in both.
Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all,
And art confederate with a damned pack
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me.
But with these nails I'll pluck out these false eyes
That would behold in me this shameful sport.
More company! The fiend is strong within him.
Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!
What, will you murder me?--Thou jailer, thou,
To make a rescue?
He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.
Go, bind this man, for he is frantic too.
What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer?
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man
Do outrage and displeasure to himself?
He is my prisoner. If I let him go,
The debt he owes will be required of me.
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,
And knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.--
Good Master Doctor, see him safe conveyed
Home to my house. O most unhappy day!
Master, I am here entered in bond for you.
Out on thee, villain! Wherefore dost thou mad me?
Will you be bound for nothing? Be mad, good
Cry "The devil!"
God help poor souls! How idly do they talk!
Go bear him hence.
Officer, Adriana, Luciana, Courtesan remain.]
Sister, go you with me.
One Angelo, a goldsmith. Do you know him?
Two hundred ducats.
Due for a chain your husband had of him.
He did bespeak a chain for me but had it not.
Whenas your husband all in rage today
Came to my house and took away my ring,
The ring I saw upon his finger now,
Straight after did I meet him with a chain.
It may be so, but I did never see it.--
Come, jailer, bring me where the goldsmith is.
God for Thy mercy, they are loose again!
And come with naked swords. Let's call more help
To have them bound again.
Antipholus and Dromio of Syracuse remain.]
She that would be your wife now ran from you.
Come to the Centaur. Fetch our stuff from thence.
Therefore, away, to get our stuff aboard.
Goldsmith.]
But I protest he had the chain of me,
Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.
How is the man esteemed here in the city?
Of very reverend reputation, sir,
Of credit infinite, highly beloved,
Second to none that lives here in the city.
His word might bear my wealth at any time.
Speak softly. Yonder, as I think, he walks.
Antipholus wearing the chain.]
Which he forswore most monstrously to have.
Good sir, draw near to me. I'll speak to him.--
Signior Antipholus, I wonder much
That you would put me to this shame and trouble,
And not without some scandal to yourself,
With circumstance and oaths so to deny
This chain, which now you wear so openly.
Besides the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
You have done wrong to this my honest friend,
Who, but for staying on our controversy,
Had hoisted sail and put to sea today.
This chain you had of me. Can you deny it?
Yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.
Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?
These ears of mine, thou know'st, did hear thee.
Fie on thee, wretch. 'Tis pity that thou liv'st
To walk where any honest men resort.
Thou art a villain to impeach me thus.
Against thee presently if thou dar'st stand.
Hold, hurt him not, for God's sake. He is mad.--
Some get within him; take his sword away.
Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house!
Run, master, run. For God's sake, take a house.
This is some priory. In, or we are spoiled.
Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?
To fetch my poor distracted husband hence.
Let us come in, that we may bind him fast
And bear him home for his recovery.
How long hath this possession held the man?
This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad,
And much different from the man he was.
But till this afternoon his passion
Ne'er brake into extremity of rage.
Hath he not lost much wealth by wrack of sea?
Buried some dear friend? Hath not else his eye
Strayed his affection in unlawful love,
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing?
Which of these sorrows is he subject to?
To none of these, except it be the last,
Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.
You should for that have reprehended him.
Why, so I did.
As roughly as my modesty would let me.
Haply in private.
It was the copy of our conference.
In bed he slept not for my urging it;
At board he fed not for my urging it.
Alone, it was the subject of my theme;
In company I often glanced it.
Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.
And thereof came it that the man was mad.
The venom clamors of a jealous woman
Poisons more deadly than a mad dog's tooth.
It seems his sleeps were hindered by thy railing,
And thereof comes it that his head is light.
Thou sayst his meat was sauced with thy
Unquiet meals make ill digestions.
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred,
And what's a fever but a fit of madness?
Thou sayest his sports were hindered by thy brawls.
Sweet recreation barred, what doth ensue
But moody and dull melancholy,
Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,
And at her heels a huge infectious troop
Of pale distemperatures and foes to life?
In food, in sport, and life-preserving rest
To be disturbed would mad or man or beast.
The consequence is, then, thy jealous fits
Hath scared thy husband from the use of wits.
She never reprehended him but mildly
When he demeaned himself rough, rude, and
Why bear you these rebukes and answer not?
She did betray me to my own reproof.--
Good people, enter and lay hold on him.
No, not a creature enters in my house.
Then let your servants bring my husband forth.
Neither. He took this place for sanctuary,
And it shall privilege him from your hands
Till I have brought him to his wits again
Or lose my labor in assaying it.
Diet his sickness, for it is my office
And will have no attorney but myself;
And therefore let me have him home with me.
Be patient, for I will not let him stir
Till I have used the approved means I have,
With wholesome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers,
To make of him a formal man again.
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,
Therefore depart and leave him here with me.
And ill it doth beseem your holiness
To separate the husband and the wife.
Be quiet and depart. Thou shalt not have him.
Complain unto the Duke of this indignity.
Come, go. I will fall prostrate at his feet
And never rise until my tears and prayers
Have won his grace to come in person hither
And take perforce my husband from the Abbess.
By this, I think, the dial points at five.
Anon, I'm sure, the Duke himself in person
Comes this way to the melancholy vale,
The place of death and sorry execution
Behind the ditches of the abbey here.
To see a reverend Syracusian merchant,
Who put unluckily into this bay
Against the laws and statutes of this town,
Beheaded publicly for his offense.
See where they come. We will behold his death.
Kneel to the Duke before he pass the abbey.
Yet once again proclaim it publicly,
If any friend will pay the sum for him,
He shall not die; so much we tender him.
Justice, most sacred duke, against the Abbess.
She is a virtuous and a reverend lady.
It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.
May it please your Grace, Antipholus my husband,
Who I made lord of me and all I had
At your important letters, this ill day
That desp'rately he hurried through the street,
With him his bondman, all as mad as he,
Doing displeasure to the citizens
By rushing in their houses, bearing thence
Rings, jewels, anything his rage did like.
Once did I get him bound and sent him home
Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went
That here and there his fury had committed.
Anon, I wot not by what strong escape,
He broke from those that had the guard of him,
And with his mad attendant and himself,
Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords,
Met us again and, madly bent on us,
Chased us away, till raising of more aid,
We came again to bind them. Then they fled
Into this abbey, whither we pursued them,
And here the Abbess shuts the gates on us
And will not suffer us to fetch him out,
Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence.
Therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command
Let him be brought forth and borne hence for help.
Long since, thy husband served me in my wars,
And I to thee engaged a prince's word,
When thou didst make him master of thy bed,
To do him all the grace and good I could.
Go, some of you, knock at the abbey gate,
And bid the Lady Abbess come to me.
My master and his man are both broke loose,
Beaten the maids a-row, and bound the doctor,
Whose beard they have singed off with brands of
And ever as it blazed they threw on him
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair.
My master preaches patience to him, and the while
His man with scissors nicks him like a fool;
And sure, unless you send some present help,
Between them they will kill the conjurer.
Peace, fool. Thy master and his man are here,
And that is false thou dost report to us.
Mistress, upon my life I tell you true.
He cries for you and vows, if he can take you,
To scorch your face and to disfigure you.	
Hark, hark, I hear him, mistress. Fly, begone!
Come, stand by me. Fear nothing.--Guard with
Ay me, it is my husband. Witness you
That he is borne about invisible.
Even now we housed him in the abbey here,
And now he's there, past thought of human reason.
Justice, most gracious duke. O, grant me justice,
Even for the service that long since I did thee
When I bestrid thee in the wars and took
Deep scars to save thy life. Even for the blood
That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.
Unless the fear of death doth make me dote,
Justice, sweet prince, against that woman there,
She whom thou gav'st to me to be my wife,
That hath abused and dishonored me
Even in the strength and height of injury.
Beyond imagination is the wrong
That she this day hath shameless thrown on me.
Discover how, and thou shalt find me just.
This day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me
While she with harlots feasted in my house.
No, my good lord. Myself, he, and my sister
Today did dine together. So befall my soul
As this is false he burdens me withal.
Ne'er may I look on day nor sleep on night
But she tells to your Highness simple truth.
In this the madman justly chargeth them.
My liege, I am advised what I say,
Neither disturbed with the effect of wine,
Nor heady-rash provoked with raging ire,
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.
This woman locked me out this day from dinner.
That goldsmith there, were he not packed with her,
Could witness it, for he was with me then,
Who parted with me to go fetch a chain,
Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
Where Balthasar and I did dine together.
Our dinner done and he not coming thither,
And in his company that gentleman.
There did this perjured goldsmith swear me down
That I this day of him received the chain,
Which, God He knows, I saw not; for the which
He did arrest me with an officer.
For certain ducats. He with none returned.
Then fairly I bespoke the officer
To go in person with me to my house.
By th' way we met
My wife, her sister, and a rabble more
Of vile confederates. Along with them
They brought one Pinch, a hungry, lean-faced
Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer,
And, gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,
And with no face  outfacing me,
Cries out I was possessed. Then all together
They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence,
And in a dark and dankish vault at home
There left me and my man, both bound together,
Till gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,
Ran hither to your Grace, whom I beseech
To give me ample satisfaction
For these deep shames and great indignities.
My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him:
That he dined not at home, but was locked out.
But had he such a chain of thee or no?
He had, my lord, and when he ran in here,
These people saw the chain about his neck.
Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine
Heard you confess you had the chain of him
After you first forswore it on the mart,
And thereupon I drew my sword on you,
And then you fled into this abbey here,
From whence I think you are come by miracle.
Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me.
And this is false you burden me withal.
Why, what an intricate impeach is this!
If here you housed him, here he would have been.
If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly.
Denies that saying.  Sirrah,
Sir, he dined with her there at the Porpentine.
He did, and from my finger snatched that ring.
Saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here?
As sure, my liege, as I do see your Grace.
Why, this is strange.--Go call the Abbess hither.
Most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word.
Haply I see a friend will save my life
And pay the sum that may deliver me.
Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt.
Is not your name, sir, called Antipholus?
And is not that your bondman Dromio?
Within this hour I was his bondman, sir,
But he, I thank him, gnawed in two my cords.
Now am I Dromio, and his man, unbound.
Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you,
For lately we were bound as you are now.
You are not Pinch's patient, are you, sir?
Why look you strange on me? You know me well.
And careful hours with time's deformed hand
Have written strange defeatures in my face.
But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?
Not know my voice! O time's extremity,
Hast thou so cracked and splitted my poor tongue
In seven short years that here my only son
Knows not my feeble key of untuned cares?
Though now this grained face of mine be hid
In sap-consuming winter's drizzled snow,
And all the conduits of my blood froze up,
Yet hath my night of life some memory,
My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left,
My dull deaf ears a little use to hear.
All these old witnesses--I cannot err--
Tell me thou art my son Antipholus.
But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy,
Thou know'st we parted. But perhaps, my son,
Thou sham'st to acknowledge me in misery.
The Duke and all that know me in the city
Can witness with me that it is not so.
Have I been patron to Antipholus,
During which time he ne'er saw Syracusa.
Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse.]
Most mighty duke, behold a man much wronged.
One of these men is genius to the other.
And so, of these, which is the natural man
And which the spirit? Who deciphers them?
Egeon art thou not, or else his ghost?
Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds
And gain a husband by his liberty.--
Speak, old Egeon, if thou be'st the man
That hadst a wife once called Emilia,
That bore thee at a burden two fair sons.
And speak unto the same Emilia.
Why, here begins his morning story right:
These two Antipholus', these two so like,
And these two Dromios, one in semblance--
Besides her urging of her wrack at sea--
These are the parents to these children,
Which accidentally are met together.
If I dream not, thou art Emilia.
If thou art she, tell me, where is that son
That floated with thee on the fatal raft?
By men of Epidamium he and I
And the twin Dromio all were taken up;
But by and by rude fishermen of Corinth
By force took Dromio and my son from them,
And me they left with those of Epidamium.
What then became of them I cannot tell;
Antipholus, thou cam'st from Corinth first.
No, sir, not I. I came from Syracuse.
Stay, stand apart. I know not which is which.
Brought to this town by that most famous warrior
Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle.
Which of you two did dine with me today?
And so do I, yet did she call me so,
And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here,
Did call me brother.  What I told you
If this be not a dream I see and hear.
That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.
And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.
By Dromio, but I think he brought it not.
This purse of ducats I received from you,
And Dromio my man did bring them me.
And I was ta'en for him, and he for me,
And thereupon these errors are arose.
These ducats pawn I for my father here.
It shall not need. Thy father hath his life.
Sir, I must have that diamond from you.
There, take it, and much thanks for my good cheer.
Renowned duke, vouchsafe to take the pains
To go with us into the abbey here
And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes,
And all that are assembled in this place
That by this sympathized one day's error
Have suffered wrong. Go, keep us company,
And we shall make full satisfaction.--
Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail
Of you, my sons, and till this present hour
My heavy burden ne'er delivered.--
The Duke, my husband, and my children both,
And you, the calendars of their nativity,
Go to a gossips' feast, and go with me.
After so long grief, such nativity!
With all my heart I'll gossip at this feast.
Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?
Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embarked?
Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.
He speaks to me.--I am your master, Dromio.
Come, go with us. We'll look to that anon.
Embrace thy brother there. Rejoice with him.
There is a fat friend at your master's house
That kitchened me for you today at dinner.
She now shall be my sister, not my wife.
Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother.
Will you walk in to see their gossiping?
Till then, lead thou first.
We came into the world like brother and brother,
And now let's go hand in hand, not one before
Of government the properties to unfold
Would seem in me t' affect speech and discourse,
Since I am put to know that your own science
Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
My strength can give you. Then no more remains
But that, to your sufficiency, as your worth is able,
And let them work. The nature of our people,
Our city's institutions, and the terms
For common justice, you're as pregnant in
As art and practice hath enriched any
That we remember. There is our commission,
From which we would not have you warp.--Call
What figure of us think you he will bear?
For you must know, we have with special soul
Elected him our absence to supply,
Lent him our terror, dressed him with our love,
And given his deputation all the organs
Of our own power. What think you of it?
If any in Vienna be of worth
To undergo such ample grace and honor,
It is Lord Angelo.
Always obedient to your Grace's will,
There is a kind of character in thy life
That to th' observer doth thy history
Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings
Are not thine own so proper as to waste
Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touched
But to fine issues, nor nature never lends
The smallest scruple of her excellence
But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
Herself the glory of a creditor,
Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech
To one that can my part in him advertise.
Hold, therefore, Angelo.
In our remove be thou at full ourself.
Mortality and mercy in Vienna
Live in thy tongue and heart. Old Escalus,
Though first in question, is thy secondary.
Take thy commission.	
Let there be some more test made of my mettle
Before so noble and so great a figure
Be stamped upon it.
We have with a leavened and prepared choice
Proceeded to you. Therefore, take your honors.
Our haste from hence is of so quick condition
That it prefers itself and leaves unquestioned
Matters of needful value. We shall write to you,
As time and our concernings shall importune,
How it goes with us, and do look to know
What doth befall you here. So fare you well.
To th' hopeful execution do I leave you
Of your commissions.
That we may bring you something on the way.
Nor need you, on mine honor, have to do
With any scruple. Your scope is as mine own,
So to enforce or qualify the laws
As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand.
But do not like to stage me to their eyes.
Though it do well, I do not relish well
Their loud applause and aves vehement,
Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.
The heavens give safety to your purposes.
Lead forth and bring you back in happiness.
To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
To look into the bottom of my place.
And we may soon our satisfaction have
Touching that point.
They put forth to steal. There's not a soldier of
Impiety has made a feast of thee.
Art thou sure of this?
Julietta with child.
How now? What's the news with you?
You have not heard of the proclamation, have you?
What shall become of me?
Courage. There will be pity taken on you. You that
Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to th' world?
Bear me to prison, where I am committed.
But from Lord Angelo by special charge.
Thus can the demigod Authority
Make us pay down for our offense, by weight,
The words of heaven: on whom it will, it will;
On whom it will not, so; yet still 'tis just.
Why, how now, Claudio? Whence comes this
From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty.
As surfeit is the father of much fast,
So every scope by the immoderate use
Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue,
Like rats that raven down their proper bane,
What but to speak of would offend again.
One word, good friend.--Lucio, a word with you.
Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
You know the lady. She is fast my wife,
Save that we do the denunciation lack
Of outward order. This we came not to
Only for propagation of a dower
Remaining in the coffer of her friends,
From whom we thought it meet to hide our love
Till time had made them for us. But it chances
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment
With character too gross is writ on Juliet.
With child, perhaps?
And the new deputy now for the Duke--
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
Or whether that the body public be
Who, newly in the seat, that it may know
He can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
Whether the tyranny be in his place
Or in his eminence that fills it up,
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
Which have, like unscoured armor, hung by th' wall
So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round,
And none of them been worn; and for a name
Now puts the drowsy and neglected act
Freshly on me. 'Tis surely for a name.
This day my sister should the cloister enter
And there receive her approbation.
Acquaint her with the danger of my state;
Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him.
There is a prone and speechless dialect
Such as move men. Besides, she hath prosperous art
When she will play with reason and discourse,
And well she can persuade.
No, holy father, throw away that thought.
Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee
To give me secret harbor hath a purpose
More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
Of burning youth.
My holy sir, none better knows than you
How I have ever loved the life removed,
And held in idle price to haunt assemblies
Where youth and cost witless bravery keeps.
My absolute power and place here in Vienna,
And he supposes me traveled to Poland,
For so I have strewed it in the common ear,
And so it is received. Now, pious sir,
You will demand of me why I do this.
We have strict statutes and most biting laws,
The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds,
Which for this fourteen years we have let slip,
Even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave
That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,
Having bound up the threat'ning twigs of birch
Only to stick it in their children's sight
For terror, not to use--in time the rod
More mocked than feared--so our decrees,
Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead,
And liberty plucks justice by the nose,
The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
Goes all decorum.
To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased,
And it in you more dreadful would have seemed
Than in Lord Angelo.
Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
For what I bid them do; for we bid this be done
When evil deeds have their permissive pass
And not the punishment. Therefore, indeed, my
Who may in th' ambush of my name strike home,
And yet my nature never in the fight
To do in slander. And to behold his sway
Visit both prince and people. Therefore I prithee
Supply me with the habit, and instruct me
How I may formally in person bear
Like a true friar. More reasons for this action
At our more leisure shall I render you.
Only this one: Lord Angelo is precise,
Stands at a guard with envy, scarce confesses
That his blood flows or that his appetite
Is more to bread than stone. Hence shall we see,
If power change purpose, what our seemers be.
And have you nuns no farther privileges?
Yes, truly. I speak not as desiring more,
But rather wishing a more strict restraint
Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.
Ho, peace be in this place!
It is a man's voice. Gentle Isabella,
Turn you the key and know his business of him.
You may; I may not. You are yet unsworn.
When you have vowed, you must not speak with men
But in the presence of the Prioress.
Then, if you speak, you must not show your face;
Or if you show your face, you must not speak.
He calls again. I pray you answer him.
Peace and prosperity! Who is 't that calls?
Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
Proclaim you are no less. Can you so stead me
As bring me to the sight of Isabella,
To her unhappy brother, Claudio?
Why "her unhappy brother"? Let me ask,
The rather for I now must make you know
Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you.
Not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
For that which, if myself might be his judge,
He should receive his punishment in thanks:
He hath got his friend with child.
Sir, make me not your story.
With maids to seem the lapwing and to jest,
Tongue far from heart, play with all virgins so.
By your renouncement an immortal spirit,
And to be talked with in sincerity
As with a saint.
You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.
Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, 'tis thus:
Your brother and his lover have embraced;
As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
That from the seedness the bare fallow brings
To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.
Someone with child by him? My cousin Juliet?
Adoptedly, as schoolmaids change their names
By vain though apt affection.
The Duke is very strangely gone from hence;
Bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
In hand, and hope of action; but we do learn,
By those that know the very nerves of state,
His givings-out were of an infinite distance
From his true-meant design. Upon his place,
And with full line of his authority,
Governs Lord Angelo, a man whose blood
Is very snow-broth; one who never feels
The wanton stings and motions of the sense,
But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
With profits of the mind: study and fast.
He--to give fear to use and liberty,
Which have for long run by the hideous law
As mice by lions--hath picked out an act
Under whose heavy sense your brother's life
Falls into forfeit. He arrests him on it,
And follows close the rigor of the statute
To make him an example. All hope is gone
Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
To soften Angelo. And that's my pith of business
Seek his life?
And, as I hear, the Provost hath a warrant
For 's execution.
Alas, what poor ability's in me
To do him good?
My power? Alas, I doubt--
And makes us lose the good we oft might win
By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo
And let him learn to know, when maidens sue
Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
All their petitions are as freely theirs
As they themselves would owe them.
No longer staying but to give the Mother
Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you.
Commend me to my brother. Soon at night
We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
And let it keep one shape till custom make it
Their perch and not their terror.
Let us be keen and rather cut a little
Than fall and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman
Whom I would save had a most noble father.
Let but your Honor know,
Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue,
That, in the working of your own affections,
Had time cohered with place, or place with wishing,
Or that the resolute acting of your blood
Could have attained th' effect of your own purpose,
Whether you had not sometime in your life
Erred in this point which now you censure him,
And pulled the law upon you.
Another thing to fall. I not deny
The jury passing on the prisoner's life
May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
Guiltier than him they try. What's open made to
That justice seizes. What knows the laws
That thieves do pass on thieves? 'Tis very pregnant,
The jewel that we find, we stoop and take 't
Because we see it; but what we do not see,
We tread upon and never think of it.
You may not so extenuate his offense
For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,
When I that censure him do so offend,
Let mine own judgment pattern out my death,
And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.
Be it as your wisdom will.
Here, if it like your Honor.
Be executed by nine tomorrow morning.
Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared,
For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.
Well, heaven forgive him and forgive us all.
Some rise by sin and some by virtue fall.
Some run from brakes of ice and answer none,
And some condemned for a fault alone.
Honor two notorious benefactors.
Are they not malefactors?
Elbow is your name? Why dost thou not speak,
Elbow?
Sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very
Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and being great-bellied,
Master Froth?
This will last out a night in Russia
When nights are longest there. I'll take my leave,
And leave you to the hearing of the cause,
Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
Now, sir, come on. What was done to Elbow's wife,
Is this true?
Hannibal, or I'll have mine action of batt'ry on thee.
Thou seest, thou wicked varlet, now, what's
Master Froth, I would not have you acquainted with
Come you hither to me, Master Tapster. What's your
Pompey the Great. Pompey, you are partly a bawd,
Pompey, howsoever you color it in being a tapster,
Vienna ten year, I'll rent the fairest house in it after
Whip me? No, no, let carman whip his jade.
The valiant heart's not whipped out of his trade.
It grieves me for the death of Claudio,
But there's no remedy.
Lord Angelo is severe.
Mercy is not itself that oft looks so.
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
But yet, poor Claudio. There is no remedy.
Come, sir.
He's hearing of a cause. He will come straight.
His pleasure. Maybe he will relent. Alas,
He hath but as offended in a dream.
All sects, all ages smack of this vice, and he
To die for 't?
Is it your will Claudio shall die tomorrow?
Did not I tell thee yea? Hadst thou not order?
Why dost thou ask again?
Under your good correction, I have seen
When, after execution, judgment hath
Repented o'er his doom.
Do you your office, or give up your place
And you shall well be spared.
What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
She's very near her hour.
To some more fitter place, and that with speed.
Here is the sister of the man condemned
Desires access to you.
Ay, my good lord, a very virtuous maid,
And to be shortly of a sisterhood,
If not already.
See you the fornicatress be removed.
Let her have needful but not lavish means.
There shall be order for 't.
Stay a little while.  You're welcome.
What's your will?
Please but your Honor hear me.
There is a vice that most I do abhor,
And most desire should meet the blow of justice,
For which I would not plead, but that I must;
For which I must not plead, but that I am
At war 'twixt will and will not.
And not my brother.
Condemn the fault, and not the actor of it?
Why, every fault's condemned ere it be done.
Mine were the very cipher of a function
To fine the faults whose fine stands in record
And let go by the actor.
Give 't not o'er so. To him again, entreat him,
Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown.
You are too cold. If you should need a pin,
You could not with more tame a tongue desire it.
To him, I say.
Must he needs die?
Yes, I do think that you might pardon him,
And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.
Look what I will not, that I cannot do.
But might you do 't and do the world no wrong
If so your heart were touched with that remorse
As mine is to him?
Too late? Why, no. I that do speak a word
May call it back again. Well believe this:
No ceremony that to great ones longs,
Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword,
The marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe
Become them with one half so good a grace
As mercy does.
If he had been as you, and you as he,
You would have slipped like him, but he like you
Would not have been so stern.
And you were Isabel. Should it then be thus?
No. I would tell what 'twere to be a judge
And what a prisoner.
Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
And you but waste your words.
Why all the souls that were were forfeit once,
And He that might the vantage best have took
Found out the remedy. How would you be
If He which is the top of judgment should
But judge you as you are? O, think on that,
And mercy then will breathe within your lips
Like man new-made.
It is the law, not I, condemn your brother.
Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
It should be thus with him. He must die tomorrow.
Tomorrow? O, that's sudden! Spare him, spare him.
He's not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens
We kill the fowl of season. Shall we serve heaven
With less respect than we do minister
To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink
Who is it that hath died for this offense?
There's many have committed it.
The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept.
Those many had not dared to do that evil
If the first that did th' edict infringe
Had answered for his deed. Now 'tis awake,
Takes note of what is done, and, like a prophet,
Looks in a glass that shows what future evils--
Either now, or by remissness new-conceived,
And so in progress to be hatched and born--
Are now to have no successive degrees
But, ere they live, to end.
For then I pity those I do not know,
Which a dismissed offense would after gall,
And do him right that, answering one foul wrong,
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
Your brother dies tomorrow; be content.
So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
And he that suffers. O, it is excellent
To have a giant's strength, but it is tyrannous
To use it like a giant.
As Jove himself does, Jove would never be quiet,
For every pelting, petty officer
Would use his heaven for thunder,
Nothing but thunder. Merciful heaven,
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt
Splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak,
Than the soft myrtle. But man, proud man,
Dressed in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he's most assured,
His glassy essence, like an angry ape
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
As makes the angels weep, who with our spleens
Would all themselves laugh mortal.
He's coming. I perceive 't.
We cannot weigh our brother with ourself.
Great men may jest with saints; 'tis wit in them,
But in the less, foul profanation.
Thou 'rt i' th' right, girl. More o' that.
That in the captain's but a choleric word
Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.
Art avised o' that? More on 't.
Why do you put these sayings upon me?
Because authority, though it err like others,
Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself
That skins the vice o' th' top. Go to your bosom,
Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
That's like my brother's fault. If it confess
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
Against my brother's life.
That my sense breeds with it.	
Fare you well.
Hark how I'll bribe you. Good my lord, turn back.
Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.
Not with fond sicles of the tested gold,
Or stones whose rate are either rich or poor
As fancy values them, but with true prayers
That shall be up at heaven and enter there
Ere sunrise, prayers from preserved souls,
From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate
To nothing temporal.
Heaven keep your Honor safe.
For I am that way going to temptation
Where prayers cross.
Shall I attend your Lordship?
What's this? What's this? Is this her fault or mine?
The tempter or the tempted, who sins most, ha?
Not she, nor doth she tempt; but it is I
That, lying by the violet in the sun,
Do as the carrion does, not as the flower,
Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be
That modesty may more betray our sense
Than woman's lightness? Having waste ground
Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary
And pitch our evils there? O fie, fie, fie!
What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?
Dost thou desire her foully for those things
That make her good? O, let her brother live.
Thieves for their robbery have authority
When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her
That I desire to hear her speak again
And feast upon her eyes? What is 't I dream on?
With saints dost bait thy hook. Most dangerous
Is that temptation that doth goad us on
To sin in loving virtue. Never could the strumpet
With all her double vigor, art and nature,
Once stir my temper, but this virtuous maid
Subdues me quite. Ever till now
When men were fond, I smiled and wondered how.
Hail to you, provost, so I think you are.
Bound by my charity and my blest order,
Here in the prison. Do me the common right
To let me see them, and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
To them accordingly.
Look, here comes one, a gentlewoman of mine,
Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
Hath blistered her report. She is with child,
And he that got it, sentenced--a young man,
More fit to do another such offense
Than die for this.
When must he die?
And you shall be conducted.
Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
And try your penitence, if it be sound
Or hollowly put on.
Yes, as I love the woman that wronged him.
So then it seems your most offenseful act
Was mutually committed?
Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
Which sorrow is always toward ourselves, not
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
But as we stand in fear--
And take the shame with joy.
Your partner, as I hear, must die tomorrow,
And I am going with instruction to him.
Grace go with you. Benedicite.	
Must die tomorrow? O injurious love
That respites me a life, whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror.
When I would pray and think, I think and pray
To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words,
Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
Anchors on Isabel. God in my mouth,
As if I did but only chew His name,
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
Of my conception. The state whereon I studied
Is, like a good thing being often read,
Grown sere and tedious. Yea, my gravity,
Wherein--let no man hear me--I take pride,
Could I with boot change for an idle plume
Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls
To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood.
Let's write "good angel" on the devil's horn.
One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.
Teach her the way.  O heavens,
Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
Making both it unable for itself
And dispossessing all my other parts
Of necessary fitness?
So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons,
Come all to help him, and so stop the air
By which he should revive. And even so
The general subject to a well-wished king
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
Must needs appear offense.
How now, fair maid?
That you might know it would much better please me
Than to demand what 'tis. Your brother cannot live.
Yet may he live a while. And it may be
As long as you or I. Yet he must die.
When, I beseech you? That in his reprieve,
Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted
That his soul sicken not.
Ha! Fie, these filthy vices! It were as good
To pardon him that hath from nature stolen
Their saucy sweetness that do coin God's image
In stamps that are forbid. 'Tis all as easy
Falsely to take away a life true made
As to put metal in restrained means
To make a false one.
Say you so? Then I shall pose you quickly:
Which had you rather, that the most just law
Now took your brother's life, or, to redeem him,
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
As she that he hath stained?
Stand more for number than for accompt.
Nay, I'll not warrant that, for I can speak
Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life.
Might there not be a charity in sin
To save this brother's life?
It is no sin at all, but charity.
Pleased you to do 't, at peril of your soul,
Were equal poise of sin and charity.
That I do beg his life, if it be sin
Heaven let me bear it. You granting of my suit,
If that be sin, I'll make it my morn prayer
To have it added to the faults of mine
And nothing of your answer.
Your sense pursues not mine. Either you are
Or seem so, crafty, and that's not good.
Let me be ignorant and in nothing good,
But graciously to know I am no better.
Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright
When it doth tax itself, as these black masks
Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder
Than beauty could, displayed. But mark me.
To be received plain, I'll speak more gross:
Your brother is to die.
And his offense is so, as it appears,
Accountant to the law upon that pain.
Admit no other way to save his life--
As I subscribe not that, nor any other--
But, in the loss of question, that you, his sister,
Finding yourself desired of such a person
Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
Could fetch your brother from the manacles
Of the all-binding law, and that there were
No earthly mean to save him but that either
You must lay down the treasures of your body
To this supposed, or else to let him suffer,
What would you do?
As much for my poor brother as myself.
That is, were I under the terms of death,
Th' impression of keen whips I'd wear as rubies
And strip myself to death as to a bed
That longing have been sick for, ere I'd yield
My body up to shame.
Better it were a brother died at once
Than that a sister, by redeeming him,
Should die forever.
Were not you then as cruel as the sentence
That you have slandered so?
Ignomy in ransom and free pardon
Are of two houses. Lawful mercy
Is nothing kin to foul redemption.
You seemed of late to make the law a tyrant,
And rather proved the sliding of your brother
To have what we would have, we speak not what we
For his advantage that I dearly love.
We are all frail.
If not a fedary but only he
Owe and succeed thy weakness.
Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves,
Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
Women--help, heaven--men their creation mar
In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail,
For we are soft as our complexions are,
And credulous to false prints.
And from this testimony of your own sex,
Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
Than faults may shake our frames, let me be bold.
That is, a woman. If you be more, you're none.
If you be one, as you are well expressed
By all external warrants, show it now
By putting on the destined livery.
Let me entreat you speak the former language.
And you tell me that he shall die for 't.
He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.
Which seems a little fouler than it is
To pluck on others.
My words express my purpose.
Ha! Little honor to be much believed,
And most pernicious purpose. Seeming, seeming!
Sign me a present pardon for my brother
Or with an outstretched throat I'll tell the world
What man thou art.
My unsoiled name, th' austereness of my life,
My vouch against you, and my place i' th' state
Will so your accusation overweigh
That you shall stifle in your own report
And smell of calumny. I have begun,
And now I give my sensual race the rein.
Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite;
Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes
That banish what they sue for. Redeem thy brother
By yielding up thy body to my will,
Or else he must not only die the death,
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
To ling'ring sufferance. Answer me tomorrow,
Or by the affection that now guides me most,
Say what you can, my false o'erweighs your true.
To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
Who would believe me? O, perilous mouths,
That bear in them one and the selfsame tongue,
Either of condemnation or approof,
Bidding the law make curtsy to their will,
Hooking both right and wrong to th' appetite,
To follow as it draws. I'll to my brother.
Though he hath fall'n by prompture of the blood,
Yet hath he in him such a mind of honor
That, had he twenty heads to tender down
On twenty bloody blocks, he'd yield them up
Before his sister should her body stoop
To such abhorred pollution.
Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die.
More than our brother is our chastity.
And fit his mind to death, for his soul's rest.
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
The miserable have no other medicine
But only hope.
Be absolute for death. Either death or life
Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life:
If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
That none but fools would keep. A breath thou art,
Servile to all the skyey influences
That doth this habitation where thou keep'st
Hourly afflict. Merely, thou art death's fool,
For him thou labor'st by thy flight to shun,
And yet runn'st toward him still. Thou art not noble,
For all th' accommodations that thou bear'st
Are nursed by baseness. Thou 'rt by no means
For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,
And that thou oft provok'st, yet grossly fear'st
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself,
For thou exists on many a thousand grains
That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not,
For what thou hast not, still thou striv'st to get,
And what thou hast, forget'st. Thou art not certain,
For thy complexion shifts to strange effects
After the moon. If thou art rich, thou 'rt poor,
For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
Thou bear'st thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none,
For thine own bowels which do call thee sire,
The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum
For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor
But as it were an after-dinner's sleep
Dreaming on both, for all thy blessed youth
Becomes as aged and doth beg the alms
Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty
To make thy riches pleasant. What's yet in this
That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
Lie hid more thousand deaths; yet death we fear,
That makes these odds all even.
To sue to live, I find I seek to die,
And seeking death, find life. Let it come on.
What ho! Peace here, grace, and good company.
Who's there? Come in. The wish deserves a welcome.
Dear sir, ere long I'll visit you again.
My business is a word or two with Claudio.
And very welcome.--Look, signior, here's your
Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be
As all comforts are, most good, most good indeed.
Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,
Intends you for his swift ambassador,
Where you shall be an everlasting leiger;
Therefore your best appointment make with speed.
Tomorrow you set on.
None but such remedy as, to save a head,
To cleave a heart in twain.
There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
If you'll implore it, that will free your life
But fetter you till death.
Ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint,
Though all the world's vastidity you had,
To a determined scope.
In such a one as, you consenting to 't,
Would bark your honor from that trunk you bear
And leave you naked.
Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
And six or seven winters more respect
Than a perpetual honor. Dar'st thou die?
The sense of death is most in apprehension,
And the poor beetle that we tread upon
In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
As when a giant dies.
Think you I can a resolution fetch
From flowery tenderness? If I must die,
And hug it in mine arms.
There spake my brother! There my father's grave
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die.
Thou art too noble to conserve a life
In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy--
Whose settled visage and deliberate word
Nips youth i' th' head, and follies doth enew
As falcon doth the fowl--is yet a devil.
His filth within being cast, he would appear
The damned'st body to invest and cover
In prenzie guards. Dost thou think, Claudio,
If I would yield him my virginity
Thou mightst be freed?
Yes, he would give 't thee; from this rank offense,
So to offend him still. This night's the time
That I should do what I abhor to name,
Or else thou diest tomorrow.
As frankly as a pin.
Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.
That thus can make him bite the law by th' nose,
When he would force it? Sure it is no sin,
Or of the deadly seven it is the least.
If it were damnable, he being so wise,
Why would he for the momentary trick
Be perdurably fined? O, Isabel--
What says my brother?
Ay, but to die, and go we know not where,
To lie in cold obstruction and to rot,
This sensible warm motion to become
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice,
To be imprisoned in the viewless winds
And blown with restless violence round about
The pendent world; or to be worse than worst
Of those that lawless and incertain thought
Imagine howling--'tis too horrible.
The weariest and most loathed worldly life
That age, ache, penury, and imprisonment
Can lay on nature is a paradise
To what we fear of death.
What sin you do to save a brother's life,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far
That it becomes a virtue.
Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
Is 't not a kind of incest to take life
From thine own sister's shame? What should I think?
Heaven shield my mother played my father fair,
For such a warped slip of wilderness
Ne'er issued from his blood. Take my defiance;
Die, perish. Might but my bending down
Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
No word to save thee.
Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd.
Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
Between which time of the contract and
Angelo.
Angelo, answer his requiring with a plausible obedience,
Mariana advantaged, and the corrupt deputy
Fie, sirrah, a bawd, a wicked bawd!
The evil that thou causest to be done,
That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
From such a filthy vice; say to thyself,
From their abominable and beastly touches
Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.
Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
Thou wilt prove his.--Take him to prison, officer.
Correction and instruction must both work
Ere this rude beast will profit.
If he be a whoremonger and comes before
That we were all, as some would seem to be,
From our faults, as faults from seeming, free.
Caesar? Art thou led in triumph? What, is there
Ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd, an
Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the prison,
Pompey. You will turn good husband now,
Pompey; you will keep the house.
If you take it not patiently, why, your mettle is
What news, friar, of the Duke?
He puts transgression to 't.
Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting
Duke had crotchets in him. He would be drunk too,
Duke, and I believe I know the cause of his
Duke to be wise.
But indeed I can do you little harm; you'll
Marry, this Claudio is condemned for untrussing.
Farewell, good friar. I prithee pray for me. The
Duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on
Fridays. He's now past it, yet--and I say to thee--
No might nor greatness in mortality
Can censure scape. Back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
But who comes here?
Overdone, a Bawd.]
Go to, no more words.	
Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered.
Claudio must die tomorrow. Let him be furnished
Not of this country, though my chance is now
To use it for my time. I am a brother
Of gracious order, late come from the See
In special business from his Holiness.
Novelty is only in request, and it is as dangerous to
Claudio prepared. I am made to understand that
He who the sword of heaven will bear
Should be as holy as severe,
Pattern in himself to know,
Grace to stand, and virtue go;
More nor less to others paying
Than by self-offenses weighing.
Shame to him whose cruel striking
Kills for faults of his own liking.
Twice treble shame on Angelo,
To weed my vice, and let his grow.
Though angel on the outward side!
How may likeness made in crimes,
Making practice on the times,
To draw with idle spiders' strings
Most ponderous and substantial things.
Craft against vice I must apply.
With Angelo tonight shall lie
His old betrothed but despised.
So disguise shall, by th' disguised,
Pay with falsehood false exacting
And perform an old contracting.
Song.
Break off thy song and haste thee quick away.
Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
Hath often stilled my brawling discontent.
You had not found me here so musical.
Let me excuse me, and believe me so,
My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.
To make bad good and good provoke to harm.
What is the news from this good deputy?
He hath a garden circummured with brick,
Whose western side is with a vineyard backed;
And to that vineyard is a planched gate
That makes his opening with this bigger key.
This other doth command a little door
Which from the vineyard to the garden leads.
There have I made my promise, upon the
Heavy middle of the night, to call upon him.
But shall you on your knowledge find this way?
With whispering and most guilty diligence,
In action all of precept, he did show me
The way twice o'er.
Between you 'greed concerning her observance?
No, none, but only a repair i' th' dark,
And that I have possessed him my most stay
Can be but brief, for I have made him know
That stays upon me, whose persuasion is
She comes to do you good.
Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?
Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.
Take then this your companion by the hand,
Who hath a story ready for your ear.
The vaporous night approaches.
Are stuck upon thee; volumes of report
Run with these false, and, most contrarious, quest
Upon thy doings; thousand escapes of wit
Make thee the father of their idle dream
And rack thee in their fancies.
She'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
If you advise it.
But my entreaty too.
When you depart from him, but, soft and low,
Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
He is your husband on a precontract.
To bring you thus together 'tis no sin,
Sith that the justice of your title to him
Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go.
Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.
Claudio and Barnardine. Here is in our prison a
Call hither Barnardine and Claudio.
Th' one has my pity; not a jot the other,
Being a murderer, though he were my brother.
Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death.
Thou must be made immortal. Where's Barnardine?
As fast locked up in sleep as guiltless labor
When it lies starkly in the traveler's bones.
He will not wake.
Well, go, prepare yourself.  But hark,
Heaven give your spirits comfort. 
For the most gentle Claudio.
Welcome, father.
The best and wholesom'st spirits of the night
Envelop you, good provost. Who called here of late?
None since the curfew rung.
There's some in hope.
Not so, not so. His life is paralleled
Even with the stroke and line of his great justice.
He doth with holy abstinence subdue
That in himself which he spurs on his power
To qualify in others. Were he mealed with that
Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous,
But this being so, he's just.  Now are
This is a gentle provost. Seldom when
The steeled jailer is the friend of men.
How now, what noise? That spirit's possessed with
That wounds th' unsisting postern with these strokes.
There he must stay until the officer
Arise to let him in. He is called up.
Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,
But he must die tomorrow?
As near the dawning, provost, as it is,
You shall hear more ere morning.
You something know, yet I believe there comes
No countermand. No such example have we.
Besides, upon the very siege of justice
Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
Professed the contrary.
This is his Lordship's man.
Good morrow, for, as I take it, it is almost day.
This is his pardon, purchased by such sin
For which the pardoner himself is in.
Hence hath offense his quick celerity
When it is borne in high authority.
When vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended
That for the fault's love is th' offender friended.
Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let Claudio
Barnardine. For my better satisfaction, let me have
Claudio's head sent me by five. Let this be duly
What say you to this, sir?
Lord Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.
Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is
Barnardine be this morning executed and his head
If anything fall to you upon this, more than thanks
Deputy?
Duke.  You know the
Duke; you shall anon overread it at your pleasure,
Come away; it is almost clear dawn.
Overdone's own house, for here be many of
He's in for a commodity of brown paper and old
Dizzy and young Master Deep-vow, and Master
Copper-spur and Master Starve-lackey the rapier-and-dagger
Half-can that stabbed Pots, and I think forty more,
Lord's sake."
Unfit to live or die. O gravel heart!
After him, fellows; bring him to the block.
Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
And to transport him in the mind he is
Were damnable.
There died this morning of a cruel fever
One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
Just of his color. What if we do omit
This reprobate till he were well inclined,
And satisfy the Deputy with the visage
Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?
Dispatch it presently. The hour draws on
Prefixed by Angelo. See this be done
And sent according to command, whiles I
Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
This shall be done, good father, presently.
But Barnardine must die this afternoon,
And how shall we continue Claudio,
To save me from the danger that might come
If he were known alive?
Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and
Claudio.
Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
To yonder generation, you shall find
Your safety manifested.
Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.
Now will I write letters to Angelo--
The Provost he shall bear them--whose contents
Shall witness to him I am near at home
And that by great injunctions I am bound
To enter publicly. Him I'll desire
To meet me at the consecrated fount
By cold gradation and well-balanced form,
We shall proceed with Angelo.
Here is the head. I'll carry it myself.
Convenient is it. Make a swift return,
For I would commune with you of such things
That want no ear but yours.
The tongue of Isabel. She's come to know
If yet her brother's pardon be come hither.
But I will keep her ignorant of her good
To make her heavenly comforts of despair
When it is least expected.
Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
The better, given me by so holy a man.
Hath yet the Deputy sent my brother's pardon?
He hath released him, Isabel, from the world.
His head is off, and sent to Angelo.
Nay, but it is not so.
Show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience.
You shall not be admitted to his sight.
Unhappy Claudio, wretched Isabel,
Injurious world, most damned Angelo!
This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot.
Forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.
Mark what I say, which you shall find
By every syllable a faithful verity.
The Duke comes home tomorrow--nay, dry your
One of our convent, and his confessor,
Gives me this instance. Already he hath carried
Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
There to give up their power. If you can, pace your
In that good path that I would wish it go,
And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
Grace of the Duke, revenges to your heart,
And general honor.
This letter, then, to Friar Peter give.
Say, by this token, I desire his company
At Mariana's house tonight. Her cause and yours
Before the Duke, and to the head of Angelo
Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter.
Command these fretting waters from your eyes
With a light heart. Trust not my holy order
If I pervert your course.--Who's here?
He's a better woodman than thou tak'st him for.
They would else have married me to the rotten
Rest you well.
Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr. I shall stick.
Betimes i' th' morn, I'll call you at your house. Give
This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
And dull to all proceedings. A deflowered maid,
And by an eminent body that enforced
The law against it. But that her tender shame
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no,
For my authority bears of a credent bulk
That no particular scandal once can touch
But it confounds the breather. He should have lived,
Save that his riotous youth with dangerous sense
Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge
By so receiving a dishonored life
With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had lived.
Alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
Nothing goes right. We would, and we would not.
These letters at fit time deliver me.
The Provost knows our purpose and our plot.
The matter being afoot, keep your instruction
And hold you ever to our special drift,
Though sometimes you do blench from this to that
As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavius' house
And tell him where I stay. Give the like notice
To Valencius, Rowland, and to Crassus,
And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate.
But send me Flavius first.
Come, we will walk. There's other of our friends
Will greet us here anon. My gentle Varrius.
To speak so indirectly I am loath.
That is your part; yet I am advised to do it,
He says, to veil full purpose.
Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
He speak against me on the adverse side,
That's bitter to sweet end.
Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,
Where you may have such vantage on the Duke
He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets
The generous and gravest citizens
Have hent the gates, and very near upon
The Duke is entering. Therefore hence, away.
Provost, Officers, and Citizens at several doors.]
My very worthy cousin, fairly met.
Happy return be to your royal Grace.
Many and hearty thankings to you both.
We have made inquiry of you, and we hear
Such goodness of your justice that our soul
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
Forerunning more requital.
To lock it in the wards of covert bosom
When it deserves with characters of brass
And razure of oblivion. Give me your hand
And let the subject see, to make them know
That outward courtesies would fain proclaim
Favors that keep within.--Come, Escalus,
You must walk by us on our other hand.
And good supporters are you.
Now is your time. Speak loud, and kneel before him.
Justice, O royal duke. Vail your regard
Upon a wronged--I would fain have said, a maid.
By throwing it on any other object
Till you have heard me in my true complaint
And given me justice, justice, justice, justice.
Relate your wrongs. In what, by whom? Be brief.
Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice.
Reveal yourself to him.
You bid me seek redemption of the devil.
Hear me yourself, for that which I must speak
Must either punish me, not being believed,
Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me,
My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm.
She hath been a suitor to me for her brother
Cut off by course of justice.
And she will speak most bitterly and strange.
Most strange, but yet most truly will I speak.
That Angelo's forsworn, is it not strange?
That Angelo's a murderer, is 't not strange?
That Angelo is an adulterous thief,
An hypocrite, a virgin-violator,
Is it not strange, and strange?
It is not truer he is Angelo
Than this is all as true as it is strange.
Nay, it is ten times true, for truth is truth
To th' end of reck'ning.
She speaks this in th' infirmity of sense.
There is another comfort than this world,
That thou neglect me not with that opinion
That I am touched with madness. Make not
That which but seems unlike. 'Tis not impossible
But one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground,
May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute
As Angelo. Even so may Angelo,
In all his dressings, caracts, titles, forms,
Be an archvillain. Believe it, royal prince,
If he be less, he's nothing, but he's more,
Had I more name for badness.
If she be mad--as I believe no other--
Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
Such a dependency of thing on thing,
As e'er I heard in madness.
Harp not on that; nor do not banish reason
For inequality, but let your reason serve
To make the truth appear where it seems hid,
And hide the false seems true.
Have, sure, more lack of reason. What would you
Condemned upon the act of fornication
To lose his head, condemned by Angelo.
Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio
As then the messenger--
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo
For her poor brother's pardon.
You were not bid to speak.
Nor wished to hold my peace.
Pray you take note of it, and when you have
Be perfect.
The warrant's for yourself. Take heed to 't.
This gentleman told somewhat of my tale.
It may be right, but you are i' the wrong
To speak before your time.--Proceed.
To this pernicious caitiff deputy--
That's somewhat madly spoken.
The phrase is to the matter.
Mended again. The matter; proceed.
In brief, to set the needless process by:
How I persuaded, how I prayed and kneeled,
How he refelled me, and how I replied--
For this was of much length--the vile conclusion
He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
To his concupiscible intemperate lust,
Release my brother; and after much debatement,
My sisterly remorse confutes mine honor,
And I did yield to him. But the next morn betimes,
His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
For my poor brother's head.
By heaven, fond wretch, thou know'st not what
Or else thou art suborned against his honor
In hateful practice. First, his integrity
Stands without blemish; next, it imports no reason
That with such vehemency he should pursue
Faults proper to himself. If he had so offended,
He would have weighed thy brother by himself
And not have cut him off. Someone hath set you on.
Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
Thou cam'st here to complain.
Then, O you blessed ministers above,
Keep me in patience, and with ripened time
Unfold the evil which is here wrapped up
In countenance. Heaven shield your Grace from
As I, thus wronged, hence unbelieved go.
To prison with her. Shall we thus permit
On him so near us? This needs must be a practice.--
Who knew of your intent and coming hither?
One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.
My lord, I know him. 'Tis a meddling friar.
For certain words he spake against your Grace
In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.
Words against me? This' a good friar, belike.
And to set on this wretched woman here
Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.
But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,
Your royal ear abused. First hath this woman
Most wrongfully accused your substitute,
Who is as free from touch or soil with her
As she from one ungot.
Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?
Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
As he's reported by this gentleman;
And on my trust, a man that never yet
Did, as he vouches, misreport your Grace.
My lord, most villainously, believe it.
Well, he in time may come to clear himself;
But at this instant he is sick, my lord,
Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request,
Being come to knowledge that there was complaint
Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither
To speak as from his mouth, what he doth know
Is true and false, and what he with his oath
And all probation will make up full clear
Whensoever he's convented. First, for this woman,
To justify this worthy nobleman,
So vulgarly and personally accused,
Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes
Till she herself confess it.
Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
Give us some seats.--Come, cousin Angelo,
In this I'll be impartial. Be you judge
Of your own cause.	
Is this the witness, friar?
First, let her show her face, and after speak.
Pardon, my lord, I will not show my face
Until my husband bid me.
My lord, I do confess I ne'er was married,
And I confess besides I am no maid.
Knows not that ever he knew me.
This is no witness for Lord Angelo.
She that accuses him of fornication
In selfsame manner doth accuse my husband,
And charges him, my lord, with such a time
When, I'll depose, I had him in mine arms
With all th' effect of love.
Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo,
Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,
But knows, he thinks, that he knows Isabel's.
This is a strange abuse. Let's see thy face.
My husband bids me. Now I will unmask.
This is that face, thou cruel Angelo,
Which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on.
This is the hand which, with a vowed contract,
Was fast belocked in thine. This is the body
That took away the match from Isabel
And did supply thee at thy garden house
In her imagined person.
My lord, I must confess I know this woman,
And five years since there was some speech of
Betwixt myself and her, which was broke off,
Partly for that her promised proportions
Came short of composition, but in chief
For that her reputation was disvalued
In levity. Since which time of five years
Upon my faith and honor.
As there comes light from heaven and words from
As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
As words could make up vows. And, my good lord,
But Tuesday night last gone in 's garden house
He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
Let me in safety raise me from my knees,
Or else forever be confixed here
Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice.
My patience here is touched. I do perceive
These poor informal women are no more
But instruments of some more mightier member
That sets them on. Let me have way, my lord,
To find this practice out.
And punish them to your height of pleasure.--
Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
Compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy
Though they would swear down each particular
Were testimonies against his worth and credit
That's sealed in approbation?--You, Lord Escalus,
Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains
To find out this abuse, whence 'tis derived.
There is another friar that set them on.
Let him be sent for.
Would he were here, my lord, for he indeed
Hath set the women on to this complaint;
Your provost knows the place where he abides,
And he may fetch him.
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
Do with your injuries as seems you best
In any chastisement. I for a while
Will leave you; but stir not you till you have
Well determined upon these slanderers.
Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that Friar
Lodowick to be a dishonest person?
Respect to your great place, and let the devil
Be sometime honored for his burning throne.
Where is the Duke? 'Tis he should hear me speak.
The Duke's in us, and we will hear you speak.
Look you speak justly.
Boldly, at least.--But, O, poor souls,
Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox?
Good night to your redress. Is the Duke gone?
Then is your cause gone too. The Duke's unjust
Thus to retort your manifest appeal,
And put your trial in the villain's mouth
Which here you come to accuse.
This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.
Why, thou unreverend and unhallowed friar,
Is 't not enough thou hast suborned these women
To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth
And in the witness of his proper ear,
To call him villain? And then to glance from him
To th' Duke himself, to tax him with injustice?--
Take him hence. To th' rack with him. We'll touse
Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
What? "Unjust"?
Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he
Dare rack his own. His subject am I not,
Nor here provincial. My business in this state
Made me a looker-on here in Vienna,
Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble
Till it o'errun the stew. Laws for all faults,
But faults so countenanced that the strong statutes
Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
As much in mock as mark.
Away with him to prison.
What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio?
Is this the man that you did tell us of?
Do you know me?
Thou art the first knave that e'er mad'st a duke.--
First, provost, let me bail these gentle three.
Must have a word anon.--Lay hold on him.
What you have spoke I pardon. Sit you down.
We'll borrow place of him.  Sir, by your
Hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence
That yet can do thee office? If thou hast,
Rely upon it till my tale be heard,
And hold no longer out.
To think I can be undiscernible,
When I perceive your Grace, like power divine,
Hath looked upon my passes. Then, good prince,
No longer session hold upon my shame,
But let my trial be mine own confession.
Immediate sentence then and sequent death
Is all the grace I beg.
Go take her hence and marry her instantly.
Return him here again.--Go with him, provost.
My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonor
Than at the strangeness of it.
Your friar is now your prince. As I was then
Advertising and holy to your business,
Not changing heart with habit, I am still
Attorneyed at your service.
That I, your vassal, have employed and pained
Your unknown sovereignty.
Isabel.
And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
Your brother's death, I know, sits at your heart,
And you may marvel why I obscured myself,
Laboring to save his life, and would not rather
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power
Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid,
It was the swift celerity of his death,
Which I did think with slower foot came on,
That brained my purpose. But peace be with him.
That life is better life past fearing death
Than that which lives to fear. Make it your comfort,
So happy is your brother.
For this new-married man approaching here,
Whose salt imagination yet hath wronged
Your well-defended honor, you must pardon
For Mariana's sake. But as he adjudged your
Being criminal in double violation
Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach
Thereon dependent for your brother's life--
The very mercy of the law cries out
Most audible, even from his proper tongue,
Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
Like doth quit like, and measure still for
Then, Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested,
Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee
We do condemn thee to the very block
Where Claudio stooped to death, and with like
Away with him.
It is your husband mocked you with a husband.
Consenting to the safeguard of your honor,
For that he knew you, might reproach your life
And choke your good to come. For his possessions,
Although by confiscation they are ours,
We do instate and widow you with all
To buy you a better husband.
Never crave him. We are definitive.
Gentle my liege--
Away with him to death.  Now, sir, to
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come
Against all sense you do importune her.
Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break
And take her hence in horror.
Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me,
Hold up your hands, say nothing. I'll speak all.
They say best men are molded out of faults,
And, for the most, become much more the better
For being a little bad. So may my husband.
He dies for Claudio's death.
Look, if it please you, on this man condemned
As if my brother lived. I partly think
Till he did look on me. Since it is so,
Let him not die. My brother had but justice,
In that he did the thing for which he died.
For Angelo,
His act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
And must be buried but as an intent
That perished by the way. Thoughts are no subjects,
Intents but merely thoughts.
Your suit's unprofitable. Stand up, I say.
Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
At an unusual hour?
Had you a special warrant for the deed?
No, my good lord, it was by private message.
For which I do discharge you of your office.
Give up your keys.
Yet did repent me after more advice,
For testimony whereof, one in the prison
That should by private order else have died,
Go fetch him hither. Let me look upon him.
As you, Lord Angelo, have still appeared,
Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
And lack of tempered judgment afterward.
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
That I crave death more willingly than mercy.
Which is that Barnardine?
There was a friar told me of this man.--
Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul
That apprehends no further than this world,
And squar'st thy life according. Thou 'rt condemned.
But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all,
And pray thee take this mercy to provide
For better times to come.--Friar, advise him.
This is another prisoner that I saved
Who should have died when Claudio lost his head,
As like almost to Claudio as himself.
If he be like your brother, for his sake
Is he pardoned; and for your lovely sake,
Give me your hand and say you will be mine,
He is my brother too. But fitter time for that.
By this Lord Angelo perceives he's safe;
Methinks I see a quick'ning in his eye.--
Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well.
Look that you love your wife, her worth worth
And yet here's one in place I cannot pardon.
One all of luxury, an ass, a madman.
Wherein have I so deserved of you
That you extol me thus?
Proclaim it, provost, round about the city,
If any woman wronged by this lewd fellow--
As I have heard him swear himself there's one
Whom he begot with child--let her appear,
And he shall marry her. The nuptial finished,
Let him be whipped and hanged.
Upon mine honor, thou shalt marry her.
Thy slanders I forgive and therewithal
Remit thy other forfeits.--Take him to prison,
And see our pleasure herein executed.
She, Claudio, that you wronged, look you restore.--
Joy to you, Mariana.--Love her, Angelo.
Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness.
There's more behind that is more gratulate.--
Thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy.
We shall employ thee in a worthier place.--
Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home
The head of Ragozine for Claudio's.
Th' offense pardons itself.--Dear Isabel,
Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline,
What's mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.--
So, bring us to our palace, where we'll show
What's yet behind that's meet you all should know.
Sicilia means to pay Bohemia the visitation which
They were trained together in their childhoods,
Since their more mature dignities and royal necessities
Nine changes of the wat'ry star hath been
The shepherd's note since we have left our throne
Without a burden. Time as long again
Would be filled up, my brother, with our thanks,
And yet we should for perpetuity
Go hence in debt. And therefore, like a cipher,
Yet standing in rich place, I multiply
With one "We thank you" many thousands more
That go before it.
And pay them when you part.
Or breed upon our absence, that may blow
No sneaping winds at home to make us say
To tire your Royalty.
Than you can put us to 't.
One sev'nnight longer.
We'll part the time between 's, then, and in that
There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' th'
So soon as yours could win me. So it should now,
Were there necessity in your request, although
Do even drag me homeward, which to hinder
Were in your love a whip to me, my stay
To you a charge and trouble. To save both,
Farewell, our brother.
Speak you.
You had drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir,
Charge him too coldly. Tell him you are sure
All in Bohemia's well. This satisfaction
The bygone day proclaimed. Say this to him,
He's beat from his best ward.
To tell he longs to see his son were strong.
But let him say so then, and let him go.
But let him swear so and he shall not stay;
We'll thwack him hence with distaffs.
The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
You take my lord, I'll give him my commission
To let him there a month behind the gest
Prefixed for 's parting.--Yet, good deed, Leontes,
What lady she her lord.--You'll stay?
Nay, but you will?
You put me off with limber vows. But I,
Though you would seek t' unsphere the stars with
Should yet say "Sir, no going." Verily,
You shall not go. A lady's "verily" is
As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet?
Force me to keep you as a prisoner,
Not like a guest, so you shall pay your fees
When you depart and save your thanks. How say you?
My prisoner or my guest? By your dread "verily,"
One of them you shall be.
To be your prisoner should import offending,
Which is for me less easy to commit
Than you to punish.
But your kind hostess. Come, I'll question you
Of my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys.
You were pretty lordings then?
Two lads that thought there was no more behind
But such a day tomorrow as today,
And to be boy eternal.
The verier wag o' th' two?
We were as twinned lambs that did frisk i' th' sun
And bleat the one at th' other. What we changed
Was innocence for innocence. We knew not
The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dreamed
That any did. Had we pursued that life,
And our weak spirits ne'er been higher reared
With stronger blood, we should have answered
Boldly "Not guilty," the imposition cleared
Hereditary ours.
You have tripped since.
Temptations have since then been born to 's, for
In those unfledged days was my wife a girl;
Your precious self had then not crossed the eyes
Of my young playfellow.
Of this make no conclusion, lest you say
Your queen and I are devils. Yet go on.
Th' offenses we have made you do we'll answer,
If you first sinned with us, and that with us
You did continue fault, and that you slipped not
With any but with us.
He'll stay, my lord.
Hermione, my dearest, thou never spok'st
To better purpose.
What, have I twice said well? When was 't before?
As fat as tame things. One good deed dying
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
Our praises are our wages. You may ride 's
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
With spur we heat an acre. But to th' goal:
My last good deed was to entreat his stay.
What was my first? It has an elder sister,
Or I mistake you. O, would her name were Grace!
But once before I spoke to th' purpose? When?
Nay, let me have 't; I long.
Three crabbed months had soured themselves to
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand
And clap thyself my love; then didst thou utter
Why, lo you now, I have spoke to th' purpose twice.
The one forever earned a royal husband,
Th' other for some while a friend.
To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods.
But not for joy, not joy. This entertainment
May a free face put on, derive a liberty
From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom,
And well become the agent. 'T may, I grant.
But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers,
As now they are, and making practiced smiles
As in a looking glass, and then to sigh, as 'twere
The mort o' th' deer--O, that is entertainment
My bosom likes not, nor my brows.--Mamillius,
Art thou my boy?
Why, that's my bawcock. What, hast smutched thy
They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,
We must be neat--not neat, but cleanly, captain.
And yet the steer, the heifer, and the calf
Are all called neat.--Still virginalling
Upon his palm?--How now, you wanton calf?
Art thou my calf?
Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I
To be full like me; yet they say we are
Almost as like as eggs. Women say so,
That will say anything. But were they false
As o'erdyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false
As dice are to be wished by one that fixes
No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true
To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page,
Look on me with your welkin eye. Sweet villain,
Most dear'st, my collop! Can thy dam?--may 't
Affection, thy intention stabs the center.
Thou dost make possible things not so held,
Communicat'st with dreams--how can this be?
With what's unreal thou coactive art,
And fellow'st nothing. Then 'tis very credent
Thou may'st co-join with something; and thou dost,
And that beyond commission, and I find it,
And that to the infection of my brains
And hard'ning of my brows.
He something seems unsettled.
What cheer? How is 't with you, best brother?
As if you held a brow of much distraction.
Are you moved, my lord?
How sometimes nature will betray its folly,
Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime
To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreeched,
In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled
Lest it should bite its master and so prove,
As ornaments oft do, too dangerous.
How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
This squash, this gentleman.--Mine honest friend,
Will you take eggs for money?
You will? Why, happy man be 's dole!--My brother,
Are you so fond of your young prince as we
Do seem to be of ours?
He's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter,
Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy,
My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all.
He makes a July's day short as December,
And with his varying childness cures in me
Thoughts that would thick my blood.
Officed with me. We two will walk, my lord,
And leave you to your graver steps.--Hermione,
How thou lov'st us show in our brother's welcome.
Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap.
Next to thyself and my young rover, he's
Apparent to my heart.
We are yours i' th' garden. Shall 's attend you there?
To your own bents dispose you. You'll be found,
Be you beneath the sky.  I am angling now,
Though you perceive me not how I give line.
Go to, go to!
How she holds up the neb, the bill to him,
And arms her with the boldness of a wife
To her allowing husband!
Gone already.
Inch thick, knee-deep, o'er head and ears a forked
Go play, boy, play. Thy mother plays, and I
Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue
Will hiss me to my grave. Contempt and clamor
Will be my knell. Go play, boy, play.--There have
Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now;
And many a man there is, even at this present,
Now while I speak this, holds his wife by th' arm,
That little thinks she has been sluiced in 's absence,
And his pond fished by his next neighbor, by
Sir Smile, his neighbor. Nay, there's comfort in 't
Whiles other men have gates and those gates
As mine, against their will. Should all despair
That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
Would hang themselves. Physic for 't there's none.
It is a bawdy planet, that will strike
Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful, think it,
From east, west, north, and south. Be it concluded,
No barricado for a belly. Know 't,
It will let in and out the enemy
With bag and baggage. Many thousand on 's
Have the disease and feel 't not.--How now, boy?
What, Camillo there?
Go play, Mamillius. Thou 'rt an honest man.
Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.
You had much ado to make his anchor hold.
When you cast out, it still came home.
He would not stay at your petitions, made
His business more material.
When I shall gust it last.--How came 't, Camillo,
That he did stay?
But so it is, it is not. Was this taken
By any understanding pate but thine?
For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in
More than the common blocks. Not noted, is 't,
But of the finer natures, by some severals
Of headpiece extraordinary? Lower messes
Perchance are to this business purblind? Say.
Business, my lord? I think most understand
Bohemia stays here longer.
Ha?
To satisfy your Highness and the entreaties
Of our most gracious mistress.
Th' entreaties of your mistress? Satisfy?
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
My chamber-counsels, wherein, priestlike, thou
Hast cleansed my bosom; I from thee departed
Thy penitent reformed. But we have been
Deceived in thy integrity, deceived
In that which seems so.
To bide upon 't: thou art not honest; or,
If thou inclin'st that way, thou art a coward,
Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
From course required; or else thou must be
And therein negligent; or else a fool
That seest a game played home, the rich stake
And tak'st it all for jest.
In every one of these no man is free,
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Among the infinite doings of the world,
Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord,
If ever I were willful-negligent,
It was my folly; if industriously
Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
To do a thing where I the issue doubted,
Whereof the execution did cry out
Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear
Which oft infects the wisest. These, my lord,
Are such allowed infirmities that honesty
Is never free of. But, beseech your Grace,
Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass
By its own visage. If I then deny it,
But that's past doubt; you have, or your eyeglass
Is thicker than a cuckold's horn--or heard--
For to a vision so apparent, rumor
Cannot be mute--or thought--for cogitation
Resides not in that man that does not think--
My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess--
Or else be impudently negative
To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought--then say
My wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name
As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
Before her troth-plight. Say 't, and justify 't.
My sovereign mistress clouded so without
My present vengeance taken. 'Shrew my heart,
You never spoke what did become you less
Than this, which to reiterate were sin
As deep as that, though true.
Is leaning cheek to cheek? Is meeting noses?
Kissing with inside lip? Stopping the career
Of laughter with a sigh?--a note infallible
Of breaking honesty. Horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? Wishing clocks more swift?
Hours minutes? Noon midnight? And all eyes
Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
That would unseen be wicked? Is this nothing?
Why, then the world and all that's in 't is nothing,
The covering sky is nothing, Bohemia nothing,
My wife is nothing, nor nothing have these nothings,
If this be nothing.
Of this diseased opinion, and betimes,
For 'tis most dangerous.
No, no, my lord.
Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
Or else a hovering temporizer that
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
Inclining to them both. Were my wife's liver
Infected as her life, she would not live
The running of one glass.
Why, he that wears her like her medal, hanging
About his neck--Bohemia, who, if I
Had servants true about me, that bare eyes
To see alike mine honor as their profits,
Their own particular thrifts, they would do that
Which should undo more doing. Ay, and thou,
His cupbearer--whom I from meaner form
Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see
Plainly as heaven sees Earth and Earth sees heaven
How I am galled--mightst bespice a cup
To give mine enemy a lasting wink,
Which draft to me were cordial.
But with a ling'ring dram that should not work
Maliciously like poison. But I cannot
Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,
So sovereignly being honorable. I have loved thee--
Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
To appoint myself in this vexation, sully
The purity and whiteness of my sheets--
Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps--
Give scandal to the blood o' th' Prince, my son,
Who I do think is mine and love as mine,
Without ripe moving to 't? Would I do this?
Could man so blench?
Provided that, when he's removed, your Highness
Will take again your queen as yours at first,
Even for your son's sake, and thereby for sealing
The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms
Known and allied to yours.
Even so as I mine own course have set down.
Go then, and with a countenance as clear
As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
And with your queen. I am his cupbearer.
If from me he have wholesome beverage,
Account me not your servant.
Do 't and thou hast the one half of my heart;
Do 't not, thou splitt'st thine own.
What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
Of good Polixenes, and my ground to do 't
Is the obedience to a master, one
Who in rebellion with himself will have
All that are his so too. To do this deed,
Promotion follows. If I could find example
Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
And flourished after, I'd not do 't. But since
Nor brass, nor stone, nor parchment bears not one,
Let villainy itself forswear 't. I must
Forsake the court. To do 't or no is certain
To me a breakneck. Happy star reign now!
Here comes Bohemia.
My favor here begins to warp. Not speak?--
Good day, Camillo.
What is the news i' th' court?
The King hath on him such a countenance
As he had lost some province and a region
Loved as he loves himself. Even now I met him
With customary compliment, when he,
Wafting his eyes to th' contrary and falling
So leaves me to consider what is breeding
That changes thus his manners.
How, dare not? Do not? Do you know and dare not?
Be intelligent to me--'tis thereabouts;
For to yourself what you do know, you must,
And cannot say you dare not. Good Camillo,
Your changed complexions are to me a mirror
Which shows me mine changed too, for I must be
Myself thus altered with 't.
Which puts some of us in distemper, but
Of you that yet are well.
Make me not sighted like the basilisk.
By my regard, but killed none so. Camillo,
As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto
Clerklike experienced, which no less adorns
Our gentry than our parents' noble names,
In whose success we are gentle, I beseech you,
If you know aught which does behoove my
Thereof to be informed, imprison 't not
In ignorant concealment.
Which honor does acknowledge, whereof the least
Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
What incidency thou dost guess of harm
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near;
Which way to be prevented, if to be;
If not, how best to bear it.
Since I am charged in honor and by him
That I think honorable. Therefore mark my counsel,
Which must be e'en as swiftly followed as
Cry lost, and so goodnight.
By whom, Camillo?
He thinks, nay with all confidence he swears,
As he had seen 't or been an instrument
To vice you to 't, that you have touched his queen
Forbiddenly.
To an infected jelly, and my name
Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!
Turn then my freshest reputation to
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunned,
Nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection
That e'er was heard or read.
By each particular star in heaven and
By all their influences, you may as well
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
As or by oath remove or counsel shake
The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
Is piled upon his faith and will continue
The standing of his body.
Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.
If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
That lies enclosed in this trunk which you
Shall bear along impawned, away tonight!
Your followers I will whisper to the business,
And will by twos and threes at several posterns
Clear them o' th' city. For myself, I'll put
My fortunes to your service, which are here
By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain,
For, by the honor of my parents, I
Have uttered truth--which if you seek to prove,
Than one condemned by the King's own mouth,
His execution sworn.
Be pilot to me and thy places shall
Still neighbor mine. My ships are ready and
My people did expect my hence departure
Two days ago. This jealousy
Is for a precious creature. As she's rare,
Must it be great; and as his person's mighty,
Must it be violent; and as he does conceive
He is dishonored by a man which ever
Professed to him, why, his revenges must
In that be made more bitter. Fear o'ershades me.
Good expedition be my friend, and comfort
The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing
Of his ill-ta'en suspicion. Come, Camillo,
Thou bear'st my life off hence. Let us avoid.
It is in mine authority to command
The keys of all the posterns. Please your Highness
To take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.
Take the boy to you. He so troubles me
Shall I be your playfellow?
No, I'll none of you.
You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if
And why so, my lord?
Your brows are blacker--yet black brows, they say,
Become some women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a semicircle,
Or a half-moon made with a pen.
What color are your eyebrows?
Nay, that's a mock. I have seen a lady's nose
That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.
The Queen your mother rounds apace. We shall
Present our services to a fine new prince
One of these days, and then you'd wanton with us
If we would have you.
Into a goodly bulk. Good time encounter her!
What wisdom stirs amongst you?--Come, sir, now
And tell 's a tale.
Of sprites and goblins.
Come on, sit down. Come on, and do your best
To fright me with your sprites. You're powerful at it.
There was a man--
Dwelt by a churchyard. I will tell it softly,
Yond crickets shall not hear it.
Come on then, and give 't me in mine ear.
Was he met there? His train? Camillo with him?
Behind the tuft of pines I met them. Never
Saw I men scour so on their way. I eyed them
Even to their ships.
In my just censure, in my true opinion!
Alack, for lesser knowledge! How accursed
In being so blest! There may be in the cup
And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge
Is not infected; but if one present
Th' abhorred ingredient to his eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
With violent hefts. I have drunk, and seen the spider.
Camillo was his help in this, his pander.
There is a plot against my life, my crown.
All's true that is mistrusted. That false villain
Whom I employed was pre-employed by him.
He has discovered my design, and I
Remain a pinched thing, yea, a very trick
For them to play at will. How came the posterns
So easily open?
Which often hath no less prevailed than so
On your command.
Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
Have too much blood in him.
Bear the boy hence. He shall not come about her.
Away with him, and let her sport herself
With that she's big with,  for 'tis
Polixenes
Has made thee swell thus.
And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,
Howe'er you lean to th' nayward.
Look on her, mark her well. Be but about
To say "She is a goodly lady," and
The justice of your hearts will thereto add
Praise her but for this her without-door form,
Which on my faith deserves high speech, and
The shrug, the "hum," or "ha," these petty brands
That calumny doth use--O, I am out,
That mercy does, for calumny will sear
Virtue itself--these shrugs, these "hum"s and "ha"s,
When you have said she's goodly, come between
Ere you can say she's honest. But be 't known,
From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,
She's an adult'ress.
The most replenished villain in the world,
He were as much more villain. You, my lord,
Do but mistake.
Polixenes for Leontes. O thou thing,
Which I'll not call a creature of thy place
Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,
Should a like language use to all degrees,
And mannerly distinguishment leave out
Betwixt the prince and beggar.--I have said
She's an adult'ress; I have said with whom.
More, she's a traitor, and Camillo is
What she should shame to know herself
But with her most vile principal: that she's
That vulgars give bold'st titles; ay, and privy
To this their late escape.
Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have published me! Gentle my lord,
You scarce can right me throughly then to say
You did mistake.
In those foundations which I build upon,
The center is not big enough to bear
He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty
But that he speaks.
With an aspect more favorable. Good my lords,
Commonly are, the want of which vain dew
Perchance shall dry your pities. But I have
That honorable grief lodged here which burns
Worse than tears drown. Beseech you all, my lords,
With thoughts so qualified as your charities
Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so
The King's will be performed.
Who is 't that goes with me? Beseech your Highness
My women may be with me, for you see
My plight requires it.--Do not weep, good fools;
There is no cause. When you shall know your
Has deserved prison, then abound in tears
As I come out. This action I now go on
Is for my better grace.--Adieu, my lord.
Beseech your Highness, call the Queen again.
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
Prove violence, in the which three great ones suffer:
Yourself, your queen, your son.
Please you t' accept it--that the Queen is spotless
In this which you accuse her.
She's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where
Than when I feel and see her, no farther trust her.
For every inch of woman in the world,
Ay, every dram of woman's flesh, is false,
If she be.
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves.
You are abused, and by some putter-on
That will be damned for 't. Would I knew the
The second and the third, nine and some five;
If this prove true, they'll pay for 't. By mine honor,
To bring false generations. They are co-heirs,
And I had rather glib myself than they
Should not produce fair issue.
You smell this business with a sense as cold
As is a dead man's nose. But I do see 't and feel 't,
As you feel doing thus, and see withal
The instruments that feel.
We need no grave to bury honesty.
There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy Earth.
Upon this ground. And more it would content me
To have her honor true than your suspicion,
Be blamed for 't how you might.
Commune with you of this, but rather follow
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness
Imparts this, which if you--or stupefied
Or seeming so in skill--cannot or will not
Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves
We need no more of your advice. The matter,
The loss, the gain, the ord'ring on 't is all
Properly ours.
You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
Without more overture.
Either thou art most ignorant by age,
Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo's flight,
Added to their familiarity--
Which was as gross as ever touched conjecture,
That lacked sight only, naught for approbation
But only seeing, all other circumstances
Made up to th' deed--doth push on this
Yet, for a greater confirmation--
For in an act of this importance 'twere
Most piteous to be wild--I have dispatched in post
To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,
Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know
Of stuffed sufficiency. Now from the oracle
They will bring all, whose spiritual counsel had
Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?
Though I am satisfied and need no more
Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
Give rest to th' minds of others, such as he
Whose ignorant credulity will not
Come up to th' truth. So have we thought it good
From our free person she should be confined,
Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
Be left her to perform. Come, follow us.
We are to speak in public, for this business
Will raise us all.
If the good truth were known.
The keeper of the prison, call to him.
Let him have knowledge who I am.
Good lady,
No court in Europe is too good for thee.
What dost thou then in prison?
Now, good sir,
You know me, do you not?
And one who much I honor.
Conduct me to the Queen.
To the contrary I have express commandment.
Here's ado, to lock up honesty and honor from
Th' access of gentle visitors. Is 't lawful, pray you,
To see her women? Any of them? Emilia?
To put apart these your attendants, I
Shall bring Emilia forth.
Withdraw yourselves.
And, madam, I must be present at your conference.
Here's such ado to make no stain a stain
As passes coloring.
Dear gentlewoman,
How fares our gracious lady?
As well as one so great and so forlorn
May hold together. On her frights and griefs,
Which never tender lady hath borne greater,
She is something before her time delivered.
Lusty and like to live. The Queen receives
Much comfort in 't, says "My poor prisoner,
These dangerous unsafe lunes i' th' King, beshrew
He must be told on 't, and he shall. The office
Becomes a woman best. I'll take 't upon me.
If I prove honey-mouthed, let my tongue blister
And never to my red-looked anger be
The trumpet anymore. Pray you, Emilia,
Commend my best obedience to the Queen.
If she dares trust me with her little babe,
Her advocate to th' loud'st We do not know
How he may soften at the sight o' th' child.
The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades when speaking fails.
Your honor and your goodness is so evident
That your free undertaking cannot miss
So meet for this great errand. Please your Ladyship
To visit the next room, I'll presently
Acquaint the Queen of your most noble offer,
Who but today hammered of this design,
But durst not tempt a minister of honor
Lest she should be denied.
As boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubted
Madam, if 't please the Queen to send the babe,
Having no warrant.
This child was prisoner to the womb, and is
By law and process of great nature thence
Freed and enfranchised, not a party to
The anger of the King, nor guilty of,
If any be, the trespass of the Queen.
Do not you fear. Upon mine honor, I
Will stand betwixt you and danger.
Nor night nor day no rest. It is but weakness
To bear the matter thus, mere weakness. If
The cause were not in being--part o' th' cause,
She th' adult'ress, for the harlot king
Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
And level of my brain, plot-proof. But she
Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
Might come to me again.--Who's there?
His sickness is discharged.
Conceiving the dishonor of his mother.
He straight declined, drooped, took it deeply,
Fastened and fixed the shame on 't in himself,
Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,
And downright languished. Leave me solely. Go,
See how he fares.	
Fie, fie, no thought of him.
The very thought of my revenges that way
Recoil upon me--in himself too mighty,
And in his parties, his alliance. Let him be
Until a time may serve. For present vengeance,
Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes
Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow.
They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor
Shall she within my power.
Antigonus, and Lords.]
Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me.
Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,
Than the Queen's life? A gracious innocent soul,
More free than he is jealous.
Madam, he hath not slept tonight, commanded
None should come at him.
That creep like shadows by him and do sigh
At each his needless heavings, such as you
Nourish the cause of his awaking. I
Do come with words as medicinal as true,
Honest as either, to purge him of that humor
That presses him from sleep.
No noise, my lord, but needful conference
About some gossips for your Highness.
Away with that audacious lady. Antigonus,
On your displeasure's peril and on mine,
She should not visit you.
From all dishonesty he can. In this,
Unless he take the course that you have done--
Commit me for committing honor--trust it,
He shall not rule me.
When she will take the rein I let her run,
But she'll not stumble.
And I beseech you hear me, who professes
Myself your loyal servant, your physician,
Your most obedient counselor, yet that dares
Less appear so in comforting your evils
Than such as most seem yours--I say I come
From your good queen.
Good queen, my lord, good queen, I say "good
And would by combat make her good, so were I
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
First hand me. On mine own accord I'll off,
But first I'll do my errand.--The good queen,
For she is good, hath brought you forth a
Here 'tis--commends it to your blessing.
In so entitling me, and no less honest
Than you are mad--which is enough, I'll warrant,
As this world goes, to pass for honest.
Will you not push her out?  Give her
Thou dotard; thou art woman-tired, unroosted
By thy Dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard,
Take 't up, I say. Give 't to thy crone.
Unvenerable be thy hands if thou
Tak'st up the Princess by that forced baseness
Which he has put upon 't.
So I would you did. Then 'twere past all doubt
You'd call your children yours.
But one that's here, and that's himself. For he
The sacred honor of himself, his queen's,
His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander,
Whose sting is sharper than the sword's; and will
For, as the case now stands, it is a curse
He cannot be compelled to 't--once remove
The root of his opinion, which is rotten
As ever oak or stone was sound.
Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her
And now baits me! This brat is none of mine.
It is the issue of Polixenes.
Hence with it, and together with the dam
Commit them to the fire.
And, might we lay th' old proverb to your charge,
So like you 'tis the worse.--Behold, my lords,
Although the print be little, the whole matter
And copy of the father--eye, nose, lip,
The trick of 's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,
The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek, his
The very mold and frame of hand, nail, finger.
And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it
So like to him that got it, if thou hast
The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colors
No yellow in 't, lest she suspect, as he does,
Her children not her husband's.
And, losel, thou art worthy to be hanged
That wilt not stay her tongue.
That cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself
Hardly one subject.
Can do no more.
It is an heretic that makes the fire,
Not she which burns in 't. I'll not call you tyrant;
But this most cruel usage of your queen,
Not able to produce more accusation
Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something
Of tyranny, and will ignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to the world.
Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
Where were her life? She durst not call me so
If she did know me one. Away with her!
Look to your babe, my lord; 'tis yours. Jove send her
You that are thus so tender o'er his follies
Will never do him good, not one of you.
So, so. Farewell, we are gone.	
Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.
My child? Away with 't! Even thou, that hast
And see it instantly consumed with fire.
Even thou, and none but thou. Take it up straight.
Within this hour bring me word 'tis done,
And by good testimony, or I'll seize thy life,
With what thou else call'st thine. If thou refuse
And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so.
The bastard brains with these my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire,
For thou sett'st on thy wife.
These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
Can clear me in 't.
He is not guilty of her coming hither.
Beseech your Highness, give us better credit.
We have always truly served you, and beseech
So to esteem of us. And on our knees we beg,
As recompense of our dear services
Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
Lead on to some foul issue. We all kneel.
Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel
And call me father? Better burn it now
Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.
It shall not neither.  You, sir, come
You that have been so tenderly officious
With Lady Margery, your midwife there,
To save this bastard's life--for 'tis a bastard,
So sure as this beard's gray. What will you
To save this brat's life?
That my ability may undergo
And nobleness impose. At least thus much:
To save the innocent. Anything possible.
It shall be possible. Swear by this sword
Thou wilt perform my bidding.
Mark, and perform it, seest thou; for the fail
Of any point in 't shall not only be
Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife,
Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
As thou art liegeman to us, that thou carry
This female bastard hence, and that thou bear it
To some remote and desert place quite out
Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it,
Without more mercy, to it own protection
And favor of the climate. As by strange fortune
It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture,
That thou commend it strangely to some place
Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.
Had been more merciful.--Come on, poor babe.
Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say,
Casting their savageness aside, have done
Like offices of pity.  Sir, be prosperous
In more than this deed does require.--And blessing
Against this cruelty fight on thy side,
Poor thing, condemned to loss.
Another's issue.
From those you sent to th' oracle are come
An hour since. Cleomenes and Dion,
Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
Hasting to th' court.
Hath been beyond account.
They have been absent. 'Tis good speed, foretells
The great Apollo suddenly will have
The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords.
Summon a session, that we may arraign
Our most disloyal lady; for, as she hath
Been publicly accused, so shall she have
My heart will be a burden to me. Leave me,
And think upon my bidding.
The climate's delicate, the air most sweet,
Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
The common praise it bears.
For most it caught me, the celestial habits--
Methinks I so should term them--and the reverence
Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice,
How ceremonious, solemn, and unearthly
It was i' th' off'ring!
And the ear-deaf'ning voice o' th' oracle,
Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my sense
That I was nothing.
Prove as successful to the Queen--O, be 't so!--
As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use on 't.
Turn all to th' best! These proclamations,
So forcing faults upon Hermione,
Will clear or end the business when the oracle,
Thus by Apollo's great divine sealed up,
Shall the contents discover. Something rare
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go. Fresh horses;
And gracious be the issue.
This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce,
Even pushes 'gainst our heart: the party tried
The daughter of a king, our wife, and one
Of us too much beloved. Let us be cleared
Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
Proceed in justice, which shall have due course
Even to the guilt or the purgation.
Produce the prisoner.
It is his Highness' pleasure that the Queen
Appear in person here in court.
Silence!
King of Sicilia, thou art here accused and arraigned
King of Bohemia, and conspiring with Camillo
Since what I am to say must be but that
Which contradicts my accusation, and
The testimony on my part no other
But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me
To say "Not guilty." Mine integrity,
Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,
Be so received. But thus: if powers divine
Behold our human actions, as they do,
False accusation blush and tyranny
Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know,
Whom least will seem to do so, my past life
Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
As I am now unhappy; which is more
Than history can pattern, though devised
And played to take spectators. For behold me,
The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing
To prate and talk for life and honor fore
Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it
As I weigh grief, which I would spare. For honor,
And only that I stand for. I appeal
To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes
Came to your court, how I was in your grace,
How merited to be so; since he came,
With what encounter so uncurrent I
Have strained t' appear thus; if one jot beyond
The bound of honor, or in act or will
That way inclining, hardened be the hearts
Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin
Cry fie upon my grave.
That any of these bolder vices wanted
Less impudence to gainsay what they did
Than to perform it first.
Though 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.
You will not own it.
Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes,
With whom I am accused, I do confess
With such a kind of love as might become
So and no other, as yourself commanded,
Which not to have done, I think, had been in me
Both disobedience and ingratitude
To you and toward your friend, whose love had
Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely
That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy,
For me to try how. All I know of it
Is that Camillo was an honest man;
And why he left your court, the gods themselves,
Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.
You knew of his departure, as you know
What you have underta'en to do in 's absence.
You speak a language that I understand not.
My life stands in the level of your dreams,
Which I'll lay down.
You had a bastard by Polixenes,
And I but dreamed it. As you were past all shame--
Those of your fact are so--so past all truth,
Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as
Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
No father owning it--which is indeed
More criminal in thee than it--so thou
Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage
Look for no less than death.
The bug which you would fright me with I seek.
To me can life be no commodity.
The crown and comfort of my life, your favor,
But know not how it went. My second joy
And first fruits of my body, from his presence
Starred most unluckily, is from my breast,
The innocent milk in it most innocent mouth,
Haled out to murder; myself on every post
Proclaimed a strumpet; with immodest hatred
The childbed privilege denied, which longs
To women of all fashion; lastly, hurried
Here to this place, i' th' open air, before
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed.
But yet hear this (mistake me not: no life,
Which I would free), if I shall be condemned
Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else
But what your jealousies awake, I tell you
Apollo be my judge.
Is altogether just. Therefore bring forth,
And in Apollo's name, his oracle.	
The Emperor of Russia was my father.
His daughter's trial, that he did but see
The flatness of my misery, yet with eyes
Of pity, not revenge.
You here shall swear upon this sword of justice
That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have
This sealed-up oracle, by the hand delivered
Of great Apollo's priest, and that since then
You have not dared to break the holy seal
Nor read the secrets in 't.
Camillo a true subject, Leontes a jealous tyrant,
Now blessed be the great Apollo!
Ay, my lord, even so as it is here set down.
There is no truth at all i' th' oracle.
The sessions shall proceed. This is mere falsehood.
My lord the King, the King!
The Prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
Of the Queen's speed, is gone.
Apollo's angry, and the heavens themselves
Do strike at my injustice.
How now there?
This news is mortal to the Queen. Look down
And see what death is doing.
Her heart is but o'ercharged. She will recover.
Beseech you, tenderly apply to her
Some remedies for life.
Apollo, pardon
My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle.
New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,
Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;
For, being transported by my jealousies
To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose
Camillo for the minister to poison
My friend Polixenes, which had been done
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
My swift command, though I with death and with
Reward did threaten and encourage him,
Not doing it and being done. He, most humane
And filled with honor, to my kingly guest
Unclasped my practice, quit his fortunes here,
Which you knew great, and to the hazard
Of all incertainties himself commended,
No richer than his honor. How he glisters
Through my rust, and how his piety
Does my deeds make the blacker!
Break too!
What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
What wheels, racks, fires? What flaying? Boiling
In leads or oils? What old or newer torture
Must I receive, whose every word deserves
To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny,
Together working with thy jealousies,
Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle
For girls of nine, O, think what they have done,
And then run mad indeed, stark mad, for all
Thy bygone fooleries were but spices of it.
That thou betrayedst Polixenes, 'twas nothing;
That did but show thee of a fool, inconstant
And damnable ingrateful. Nor was 't much
Thou wouldst have poisoned good Camillo's honor,
To have him kill a king: poor trespasses,
More monstrous standing by, whereof I reckon
The casting forth to crows thy baby daughter
To be or none or little, though a devil
Would have shed water out of fire ere done 't.
Nor is 't directly laid to thee the death
Of the young prince, whose honorable thoughts,
Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
Blemished his gracious dam. This is not, no,
Laid to thy answer. But the last--O lords,
When I have said, cry woe!--the Queen, the Queen,
The sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead, and vengeance
Not dropped down yet.
Prevail not, go and see. If you can bring
Tincture or luster in her lip, her eye,
Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you
As I would do the gods.--But, O thou tyrant,
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
Than all thy woes can stir. Therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
Upon a barren mountain, and still winter
In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
To look that way thou wert.
Thou canst not speak too much. I have deserved
All tongues to talk their bitt'rest.
Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
The rashness of a woman. He is touched
To th' noble heart.--What's gone and what's past
Should be past grief. Do not receive affliction
At my petition. I beseech you, rather
Let me be punished, that have minded you
Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege,
Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman.
The love I bore your queen--lo, fool again!--
Who is lost too. Take your patience to you,
And I'll say nothing.
When most the truth, which I receive much better
Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me
To the dead bodies of my queen and son.
One grave shall be for both. Upon them shall
The causes of their death appear, unto
Our shame perpetual. Once a day I'll visit
The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there
Shall be my recreation. So long as nature
Will bear up with this exercise, so long
To these sorrows.
Thou art perfect, then, our ship hath touched upon
The deserts of Bohemia?
We have landed in ill time. The skies look grimly
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience,
The heavens with that we have in hand are angry
And frown upon 's.
Their sacred wills be done. Go, get aboard.
Look to thy bark. I'll not be long before
Too far i' th' land. 'Tis like to be loud weather.
Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
Of prey that keep upon 't.
To be so rid o' th' business.	
May walk again. If such thing be, thy mother
Appeared to me last night, for ne'er was dream
So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another.
So filled and so becoming. In pure white robes,
Like very sanctity, she did approach
My cabin where I lay, thrice bowed before me,
And, gasping to begin some speech, her eyes
Became two spouts. The fury spent, anon
Did this break from her: "Good Antigonus,
Since fate, against thy better disposition,
Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia.
There weep, and leave it crying. And, for the babe
Is counted lost forever, Perdita
Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see
Thy wife Paulina more." And so, with shrieks,
She melted into air. Affrighted much,
This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys,
Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,
Hermione hath suffered death, and that
Apollo would, this being indeed the issue
Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,
Either for life or death, upon the earth
Of its right father.--Blossom, speed thee well.
There lie, and there thy character; there these,
Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
And still rest thine.  The storm begins.
Poor wretch,
That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed
To loss and what may follow. Weep I cannot,
But my heart bleeds, and most accurst am I
To be by oath enjoined to this. Farewell.
The day frowns more and more. Thou 'rt like to have
The heavens so dim by day.
Well may I get aboard! This is the chase.
What ail'st thou, man?
Now the ship boring the moon with her mainmast,
But, first, how the poor souls roared and the sea
He's at it now.
Up with 't, keep it close. Home, home, the next way.
We are lucky, boy, and to be so still requires
Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error--
Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
To me or my swift passage that I slide
Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
To o'erthrow law and in one self-born hour
To plant and o'erwhelm custom. Let me pass
The same I am ere ancient'st order was
Or what is now received. I witness to
The times that brought them in. So shall I do
To th' freshest things now reigning, and make stale
The glistering of this present, as my tale
Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing,
As you had slept between. Leontes leaving,
Th' effects of his fond jealousies so grieving
That he shuts up himself, imagine me,
Gentle spectators, that I now may be
In fair Bohemia. And remember well
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
Equal with wond'ring. What of her ensues
Be known when 'tis brought forth. A shepherd's
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
Is th' argument of Time. Of this allow,
If ever you have spent time worse ere now.
If never, yet that Time himself doth say
He wishes earnestly you never may.
Though I have for the most part been aired abroad,
Sicilia, prithee speak no more, whose very
Say to me, when sawst thou the Prince Florizell, my
What his happier affairs may be are to me unknown,
Prithee be my present partner in this business, and
My traffic is sheets. When the kite builds, look to
He haunts wakes, fairs, and bearbaitings.
Bohemia. If you had but looked big and spit at him,
Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your
These your unusual weeds to each part of you
Does give a life--no shepherdess, but Flora
Peering in April's front. This your sheep-shearing
Is as a meeting of the petty gods,
And you the queen on 't.
To chide at your extremes it not becomes me;
The gracious mark o' th' land, you have obscured
With a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,
Most goddesslike pranked up. But that our feasts
In every mess have folly, and the feeders
Digest it with a custom, I should blush
To see you so attired, swoon, I think,
To show myself a glass.
When my good falcon made her flight across
Thy father's ground.
To me the difference forges dread. Your greatness
Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble
To think your father by some accident
Should pass this way as you did. O the Fates,
How would he look to see his work, so noble,
Vilely bound up? What would he say? Or how
Should I, in these my borrowed flaunts, behold
The sternness of his presence?
Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves,
Humbling their deities to love, have taken
The shapes of beasts upon them. Jupiter
Became a bull, and bellowed; the green Neptune
Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,
As I seem now. Their transformations
Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,
Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires
Run not before mine honor, nor my lusts
Burn hotter than my faith.
Your resolution cannot hold when 'tis
Opposed, as it must be, by th' power of the King.
One of these two must be necessities,
Which then will speak: that you must change this
Or I my life.
With these forced thoughts I prithee darken not
The mirth o' th' feast. Or I'll be thine, my fair,
Or not my father's. For I cannot be
Mine own, nor anything to any, if
Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle.
Strangle such thoughts as these with anything
That you behold the while. Your guests are coming.
Lift up your countenance as it were the day
Of celebration of that nuptial which
We two have sworn shall come.
Stand you auspicious!
Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
And let's be red with mirth.
Shepherds and Shepherdesses, Servants, Musicians,
Fie, daughter, when my old wife lived, upon
This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,
Both dame and servant; welcomed all; served all;
Would sing her song and dance her turn, now here
At upper end o' th' table, now i' th' middle;
On his shoulder, and his; her face afire
With labor, and the thing she took to quench it
She would to each one sip. You are retired
As if you were a feasted one and not
The hostess of the meeting. Pray you bid
These unknown friends to 's welcome, for it is
Come, quench your blushes and present yourself
That which you are, mistress o' th' feast. Come on,
And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
As your good flock shall prosper.
It is my father's will I should take on me
The hostess-ship o' th' day.  You're
Give me those flowers there, Dorcas.--Reverend
For you there's rosemary and rue. These keep
Seeming and savor all the winter long.
Grace and remembrance be to you both,
And welcome to our shearing.
With flowers of winter.
Not yet on summer's death nor on the birth
Of trembling winter, the fairest flowers o' th' season
Are our carnations and streaked gillyvors,
Which some call nature's bastards. Of that kind
Our rustic garden's barren, and I care not
To get slips of them.
Do you neglect them?
There is an art which in their piedness shares
With great creating nature.
Yet nature is made better by no mean
But nature makes that mean. So, over that art
Which you say adds to nature is an art
That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry
And make conceive a bark of baser kind
By bud of nobler race. This is an art
Which does mend nature, change it rather, but
The art itself is nature.
Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,
And do not call them bastards.
The dibble in earth to set one slip of them,
No more than, were I painted, I would wish
This youth should say 'twere well, and only
Desire to breed by me. Here's flowers for you:
Hot lavender, mints, savory, marjoram,
The marigold, that goes to bed wi' th' sun
And with him rises weeping. These are flowers
Of middle summer, and I think they are given
To men of middle age. You're very welcome.
And only live by gazing.
You'd be so lean that blasts of January
Would blow you through and through. 
Florizell.)] Now, my fair'st friend,
Become your time of day, 
That wear upon your virgin branches yet
Your maidenheads growing. O Proserpina,
For the flowers now that, frighted, thou let'st fall
From Dis's wagon! Daffodils,
That come before the swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes
Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses,
That die unmarried ere they can behold
Bright Phoebus in his strength--a malady
Most incident to maids; bold oxlips and
The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,
The flower-de-luce being one--O, these I lack
To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
To strew him o'er and o'er.
No, like a bank for love to lie and play on,
Not like a corse; or if, not to be buried,
But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your
Methinks I play as I have seen them do
In Whitsun pastorals. Sure this robe of mine
Does change my disposition.
Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet,
Pray so; and for the ord'ring your affairs,
To sing them too. When you do dance, I wish you
Nothing but that, move still, still so,
And own no other function. Each your doing,
So singular in each particular,
Crowns what you are doing in the present deeds,
That all your acts are queens.
Your praises are too large. But that your youth
And the true blood which peeps fairly through 't
Do plainly give you out an unstained shepherd,
With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
You wooed me the false way.
As little skill to fear as I have purpose
To put you to 't. But come, our dance, I pray.
Your hand, my Perdita. So turtles pair
That never mean to part.
This is the prettiest lowborn lass that ever
Ran on the greensward. Nothing she does or seems
But smacks of something greater than herself,
Too noble for this place.
That makes her blood look out. Good sooth, she is
The queen of curds and cream.
Mopsa must be your mistress? Marry, garlic
To mend her kissing with.
Not a word, a word. We stand upon our manners.--
Come, strike up. 
Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
Which dances with your daughter?
They call him Doricles, and boasts himself
To have a worthy feeding. But I have it
Upon his own report, and I believe it.
He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter.
Upon the water as he'll stand and read,
As 'twere, my daughter's eyes. And, to be plain,
Who loves another best.
So she does anything, though I report it
That should be silent. If young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.
No milliner can so fit his customers with gloves. He
You would think a smock were a she-angel, he so
Clamor your tongues, and not a word more.
Taleporter, and five or six honest wives that
Song.
Shepherdesses.]
Song.
They call themselves saultiers, and they have a
He's simple, and tells much.  How now,
Your heart is full of something that does take
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young
And handed love, as you do, I was wont
To load my she with knacks. I would have ransacked
The peddler's silken treasury and have poured it
To her acceptance. You have let him go
And nothing marted with him. If your lass
Interpretation should abuse and call this
Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited
For a reply, at least if you make a care
Of happy holding her.
She prizes not such trifles as these are.
The gifts she looks from me are packed and locked
Up in my heart, which I have given already,
But not delivered.  O, hear me breathe
Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem,
Hath sometime loved. I take thy hand, this hand
As soft as dove's down and as white as it,
Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fanned snow that's
By th' northern blasts twice o'er.
How prettily th' young swain seems to wash
The hand was fair before.--I have put you out.
But to your protestation. Let me hear
What you profess.
And this my neighbor too?
Than he, and men--the Earth, the heavens, and
That were I crowned the most imperial monarch,
Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
More than was ever man's, I would not prize them
Without her love; for her employ them all,
Commend them and condemn them to her service
Or to their own perdition.
This shows a sound affection.
Say you the like to him?
So well, nothing so well, no, nor mean better.
By th' pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
The purity of his.
And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't:
Her portion equal his.
Enough then for your wonder. But come on,
Contract us fore these witnesses.
And daughter, yours.
Have you a father?
Knows he of this?
Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
That best becomes the table. Pray you once more,
Is not your father grown incapable
Of reasonable affairs? Is he not stupid
With age and alt'ring rheums? Can he speak? Hear?
Know man from man? Dispute his own estate?
Lies he not bedrid, and again does nothing
But what he did being childish?
He has his health and ampler strength indeed
Than most have of his age.
You offer him, if this be so, a wrong
Something unfilial. Reason my son
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
The father, all whose joy is nothing else
But fair posterity, should hold some counsel
In such a business.
But for some other reasons, my grave sir,
Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaint
My father of this business.
He shall not.
Let him, my son. He shall not need to grieve
At knowing of thy choice.
Mark our contract.
Whom son I dare not call. Thou art too base
To be acknowledged. Thou a scepter's heir
That thus affects a sheep-hook!--Thou, old traitor,
But shorten thy life one week.--And thou, fresh
Of excellent witchcraft, whom of force must know
The royal fool thou cop'st with--
More homely than thy state.--For thee, fond boy,
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh
That thou no more shalt see this knack--as never
Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
Far'r than Deucalion off. Mark thou my words.
Follow us to the court.  Thou, churl,
Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
From the dead blow of it.--And you, enchantment,
Worthy enough a herdsman--yea, him too,
That makes himself, but for our honor therein,
Unworthy thee--if ever henceforth thou
These rural latches to his entrance open,
Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,
As thou art tender to 't.	
The selfsame sun that shines upon his court
Hides not his visage from our cottage but
Looks on alike.  Will 't please you, sir,
Of your own state take care. This dream of mine--
Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,
But milk my ewes and weep.
Speak ere thou diest.
Nor dare to know that which I know. 
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,
To die upon the bed my father died,
To lie close by his honest bones; but now
Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
Where no priest shovels in dust.  O
That knew'st this was the Prince, and wouldst
To mingle faith with him!--Undone, undone!
If I might die within this hour, I have lived
To die when I desire.	
But nothing altered. What I was, I am,
More straining on for plucking back, not following
My leash unwillingly.
You know your father's temper. At this time
He will allow no speech, which I do guess
You do not purpose to him; and as hardly
Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear.
Then, till the fury of his Highness settle,
Come not before him.
How often have I told you 'twould be thus?
How often said my dignity would last
But till 'twere known?
The violation of my faith; and then
Let nature crush the sides o' th' Earth together
And mar the seeds within. Lift up thy looks.
From my succession wipe me, father. I
Am heir to my affection.
Will thereto be obedient, I have reason.
If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,
Do bid it welcome.
So call it; but it does fulfill my vow.
Not for Bohemia nor the pomp that may
Be thereat gleaned, for all the sun sees or
The close earth wombs or the profound seas hides
In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath
To this my fair beloved. Therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever been my father's honored friend,
When he shall miss me, as in faith I mean not
To see him anymore, cast your good counsels
Upon his passion. Let myself and fortune
Tug for the time to come. This you may know
And so deliver: I am put to sea
With her who here I cannot hold on shore.
And most opportune to our need I have
For this design. What course I mean to hold
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
Concern me the reporting.
Or stronger for your need.
Resolved for flight. Now were I happy if
His going I could frame to serve my turn,
Save him from danger, do him love and honor,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
And that unhappy king, my master, whom
You have heard of my poor services i' th' love
That I have borne your father?
Have you deserved. It is my father's music
To speak your deeds, not little of his care
To have them recompensed as thought on.
If you may please to think I love the King
And, through him, what's nearest to him, which is
Your gracious self, embrace but my direction,
If your more ponderous and settled project
May suffer alteration. On mine honor,
As shall become your Highness, where you may
Enjoy your mistress--from the whom I see
There's no disjunction to be made but by,
As heavens forfend, your ruin--marry her,
And with my best endeavors in your absence,
Your discontenting father strive to qualify
And bring him up to liking.
May this, almost a miracle, be done,
That I may call thee something more than man,
And after that trust to thee?
But as th' unthought-on accident is guilty
To what we wildly do, so we profess
Ourselves to be the slaves of chance, and flies
Of every wind that blows.
This follows: if you will not change your purpose
But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia,
And there present yourself and your fair princess,
For so I see she must be, 'fore Leontes.
She shall be habited as it becomes
The partner of your bed. Methinks I see
Leontes opening his free arms and weeping
His welcomes forth, asks thee, the son, forgiveness,
As 'twere i' th' father's person; kisses the hands
Of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him
He chides to hell and bids the other grow
Faster than thought or time.
What color for my visitation shall I
Hold up before him?
To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir,
The manner of your bearing towards him, with
What you, as from your father, shall deliver,
Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down,
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
What you must say, that he shall not perceive
But that you have your father's bosom there
And speak his very heart.
There is some sap in this.
Than a wild dedication of yourselves
To unpathed waters, undreamed shores, most
To miseries enough; no hope to help you,
But as you shake off one to take another;
Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
Do their best office if they can but stay you
Where you'll be loath to be. Besides, you know
Prosperity's the very bond of love,
Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
Affliction alters.
But not take in the mind.
There shall not at your father's house these seven
Be born another such.
She's as forward of her breeding as she is
She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress
To most that teach.
But O, the thorns we stand upon!--Camillo,
Preserver of my father, now of me,
The medicine of our house, how shall we do?
We are not furnished like Bohemia's son,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
Fear none of this. I think you know my fortunes
Do all lie there. It shall be so my care
To have you royally appointed as if
The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir,
That you may know you shall not want, one word.
King's son, and scared my choughs from the chaff, I
Nay, but my letters, by this means being there
So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
And those that you'll procure from King Leontes--
Shall satisfy your father.
All that you speak shows fair.
We'll make an instrument of this, omit
Nothing may give us aid.
If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.
Fear not, man. Here's no harm intended to thee.
Though the pennyworth on his side be the worst,
Fortunate mistress--let my prophecy
Come home to you!--you must retire yourself
Into some covert. Take your sweetheart's hat
And pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face,
Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken
The truth of your own seeming, that you may--
For I do fear eyes over--to shipboard
Get undescried.
That I must bear a part.
Have you done there?
He would not call me son.
Come, lady, come.--Farewell, my friend.
Pray you, a word.	
What I do next shall be to tell the King
Of this escape, and whither they are bound;
Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail
To force him after, in whose company
Thus we set on, Camillo, to th' seaside.
The Prince himself is about a piece of iniquity,
Aside, aside! Here is more matter for a hot brain.
Every lane's end, every shop, church, session, hanging,
King she's a changeling and none of your flesh and
King, and so your flesh and blood is not to be
How now, rustics, whither are you bound?
Seest thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings?
Hath not my gait in it the measure of the
Reflect I not on thy baseness court contempt?
Think'st thou, for that I insinuate and toze from
How blest are we that are not simple men!
Yet Nature might have made me as these are.
Therefore I will not disdain.
Wherefore that box?
King. Being something gently considered, I'll bring
Remember: "stoned," and "flayed alive."
Hang him, he'll be made an example.
We must to the King, and show our strange
King concerns him nothing, let him call me rogue
Servants.]
Sir, you have done enough, and have performed
Which you have not redeemed--indeed, paid down
More penitence than done trespass. At the last,
Do as the heavens have done: forget your evil;
With them forgive yourself.
Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
My blemishes in them, and so still think of
The wrong I did myself, which was so much
That heirless it hath made my kingdom and
Destroyed the sweet'st companion that e'er man
Bred his hopes out of.
If one by one you wedded all the world,
Or from the all that are took something good
To make a perfect woman, she you killed
Would be unparalleled.
She I killed? I did so, but thou strik'st me
Sorely to say I did. It is as bitter
Upon thy tongue as in my thought. Now, good now,
Say so but seldom.
You might have spoken a thousand things that
Have done the time more benefit and graced
Your kindness better.
Would have him wed again.
You pity not the state nor the remembrance
Of his most sovereign name, consider little
What dangers by his Highness' fail of issue
May drop upon his kingdom and devour
Incertain lookers-on. What were more holy
Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
What holier than, for royalty's repair,
For present comfort, and for future good,
To bless the bed of majesty again
With a sweet fellow to 't?
Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods
Will have fulfilled their secret purposes.
For has not the divine Apollo said,
Is 't not the tenor of his oracle,
That King Leontes shall not have an heir
Till his lost child be found? Which that it shall
Is all as monstrous to our human reason
As my Antigonus to break his grave
And come again to me--who, on my life,
Did perish with the infant. 'Tis your counsel
My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
Oppose against their wills. Care not for issue.
The crown will find an heir. Great Alexander
Left his to th' worthiest; so his successor
Was like to be the best.
Who hast the memory of Hermione,
Had squared me to thy counsel! Then even now
Have taken treasure from her lips--
More rich for what they yielded.
No more such wives, therefore no wife. One worse,
And better used, would make her sainted spirit
Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,
Where we offenders now appear, soul-vexed,
And begin "Why to me?"
She had just cause.
To murder her I married.
Were I the ghost that walked, I'd bid you mark
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in 't
You chose her. Then I'd shriek, that even your ears
Should rift to hear me, and the words that followed
Should be "Remember mine."
And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;
Never to marry but by my free leave?
Never, Paulina, so be blest my spirit.
Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
You tempt him over-much.
As like Hermione as is her picture
Affront his eye.
Yet if my lord will marry--if you will, sir,
No remedy but you will--give me the office
To choose you a queen. She shall not be so young
As was your former, but she shall be such
As, walked your first queen's ghost, it should take
To see her in your arms.
We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.
Shall be when your first queen's again in breath,
Never till then.
One that gives out himself Prince Florizell,
Son of Polixenes, with his princess--she
The fairest I have yet beheld--desires access
To your high presence.
Like to his father's greatness. His approach,
So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us
By need and accident. What train?
And those but mean.
Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
That e'er the sun shone bright on.
As every present time doth boast itself
Above a better gone, so must thy grave
Give way to what's seen now.  Sir, you
Have said and writ so--but your writing now
Is colder than that theme--she had not been
Nor was not to be equalled. Thus your verse
Flowed with her beauty once. 'Tis shrewdly ebbed
To say you have seen a better.
The one I have almost forgot--your pardon;
The other, when she has obtained your eye,
Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
Of all professors else, make proselytes
Of who she but bid follow.
Women will love her that she is a woman
More worth than any man; men, that she is
The rarest of all women.
Yourself, assisted with your honored friends,
Bring them to our embracement.
Still, 'tis strange
He thus should steal upon us.
Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had paired
Well with this lord. There was not full a month
Between their births.
He dies to me again when talked of. Sure,
When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches
Will bring me to consider that which may
Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.
Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince,
For she did print your royal father off,
Conceiving you. Were I but twenty-one,
Your father's image is so hit in you,
His very air, that I should call you brother,
As I did him, and speak of something wildly
By us performed before. Most dearly welcome,
And your fair princess--goddess! O, alas,
Might thus have stood, begetting wonder, as
You, gracious couple, do. And then I lost--
All mine own folly--the society,
Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
Though bearing misery, I desire my life
Once more to look on him.
Have I here touched Sicilia, and from him
Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,
Can send his brother. And but infirmity,
Which waits upon worn times, hath something
His wished ability, he had himself
The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his
Measured to look upon you, whom he loves--
He bade me say so--more than all the scepters
And those that bear them living.
Good gentleman, the wrongs I have done thee stir
Afresh within me, and these thy offices,
So rarely kind, are as interpreters
Of my behindhand slackness. Welcome hither,
As is the spring to th' earth. And hath he too
Exposed this paragon to th' fearful usage,
At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
To greet a man not worth her pains, much less
Th' adventure of her person?
She came from Libya.
That noble honored lord, is feared and loved?
Most royal sir, from thence, from him, whose
His tears proclaimed his, parting with her. Thence,
To execute the charge my father gave me
For visiting your Highness. My best train
Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
Not only my success in Libya, sir,
But my arrival and my wife's in safety
Here where we are.
Purge all infection from our air whilst you
Do climate here! You have a holy father,
So sacred as it is, I have done sin,
For which the heavens, taking angry note,
Have left me issueless. And your father's blest,
As he from heaven merits it, with you,
Worthy his goodness. What might I have been
Might I a son and daughter now have looked on,
Such goodly things as you?
That which I shall report will bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
Bohemia greets you from himself by me,
Desires you to attach his son, who has--
His dignity and duty both cast off--
Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with
Here in your city. I now came from him.
My marvel and my message. To your court
Whiles he was hast'ning--in the chase, it seems,
Of this fair couple--meets he on the way
The father of this seeming lady and
Her brother, having both their country quitted
With this young prince.
Whose honor and whose honesty till now
Endured all weathers.
He's with the King your father.
Camillo, sir. I spake with him, who now
Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
Wretches so quake. They kneel, they kiss the earth,
Forswear themselves as often as they speak.
Bohemia stops his ears and threatens them
With divers deaths in death.
The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have
Our contract celebrated.
We are not, sir, nor are we like to be.
The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first.
The odds for high and low's alike.
Is this the daughter of a king?
When once she is my wife.
That "once," I see, by your good father's speed
Will come on very slowly. I am sorry,
Most sorry, you have broken from his liking,
Where you were tied in duty, and as sorry
Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
That you might well enjoy her.
Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
Should chase us with my father, power no jot
Hath she to change our loves.--Beseech you, sir,
Remember since you owed no more to time
Than I do now. With thought of such affections,
Step forth mine advocate. At your request,
My father will grant precious things as trifles.
Would he do so, I'd beg your precious mistress,
Which he counts but a trifle.
Your eye hath too much youth in 't. Not a month
Than what you look on now.
Even in these looks I made.  But your
Is yet unanswered. I will to your father.
Your honor not o'erthrown by your desires,
And mark what way I make. Come, good my lord.
Here comes a gentleman that happily knows more.--
The news, Rogero?
Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward. He can
Now he thanks the old shepherd, which stands by
This avouches the shepherd's son, who has not only
If all the world could have seen 't, the woe had been
Paulina--a piece many years in doing and now
Romano, who, had he himself eternity and could
Hermione hath done Hermione that they say one
Thither with all greediness of affection are they
Here come those I have done good to against my
You denied to fight with me this other day because I
Prince my brother and the Princess my sister called
Prince thou art as honest a true fellow as any is in
Bohemia.
Let boors and franklins say it; I'll swear it.
Paulina, and Lords.]
That I have had of thee!
You have paid home. But that you have vouchsafed,
With your crowned brother and these your contracted
Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,
It is a surplus of your grace which never
My life may last to answer.
We honor you with trouble. But we came
To see the statue of our queen. Your gallery
Have we passed through, not without much content
In many singularities; but we saw not
That which my daughter came to look upon,
The statue of her mother.
So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
Excels whatever yet you looked upon
Or hand of man hath done. Therefore I keep it
Lonely, apart. But here it is. Prepare
To see the life as lively mocked as ever
Still sleep mocked death. Behold, and say 'tis well.
Your wonder. But yet speak. First you, my liege.
Comes it not something near?
Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed
Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she
In thy not chiding, for she was as tender
As infancy and grace.--But yet, Paulina,
Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
So aged as this seems.
So much the more our carver's excellence,
Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her
As she lived now.
So much to my good comfort as it is
Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood,
Even with such life of majesty--warm life,
As now it coldly stands--when first I wooed her.
For being more stone than it?--O royal piece,
There's magic in thy majesty, which has
My evils conjured to remembrance and
From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
Standing like stone with thee.
And do not say 'tis superstition, that
Lady,
Dear queen, that ended when I but began,
Give me that hand of yours to kiss.
The statue is but newly fixed; the color's
Not dry.
My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,
Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
So many summers dry. Scarce any joy
Did ever so long live; no sorrow
But killed itself much sooner.
Let him that was the cause of this have power
To take off so much grief from you as he
Will piece up in himself.
If I had thought the sight of my poor image
Would thus have wrought you--for the stone is
No longer shall you gaze on 't, lest your fancy
May think anon it moves.
Would I were dead but that methinks already--
What was he that did make it?--See, my lord,
Would you not deem it breathed? And that those
Did verily bear blood?
The very life seems warm upon her lip.
The fixture of her eye has motion in 't,
As we are mocked with art.
My lord's almost so far transported that
He'll think anon it lives.
Make me to think so twenty years together!
No settled senses of the world can match
The pleasure of that madness. Let 't alone.
For this affliction has a taste as sweet
As any cordial comfort. Still methinks
There is an air comes from her. What fine chisel
Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
For I will kiss her.
The ruddiness upon her lip is wet.
You'll mar it if you kiss it, stain your own
With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?
No, not these twenty years.
Stand by, a looker-on.
Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
For more amazement. If you can behold it,
And take you by the hand. But then you'll think--
Which I protest against--I am assisted
By wicked powers.
To make her speak as move.
You do awake your faith. Then all stand still--
Or those that think it is unlawful business
No foot shall stir.
Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come,
Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him
Dear life redeems you.--You perceive she stirs.
Start not. Her actions shall be holy as
You hear my spell is lawful. Do not shun her
Until you see her die again, for then
You kill her double. Nay, present your hand.
When she was young, you wooed her; now in age
Is she become the suitor?
If this be magic, let it be an art
Lawful as eating.
If she pertain to life, let her speak too.
Ay, and make it manifest where she has lived,
Or how stol'n from the dead.
Were it but told you, should be hooted at
Like an old tale, but it appears she lives,
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.
Kneel
And pray your mother's blessing. 
Turn, good lady.
Our Perdita is found.
And from your sacred vials pour your graces
Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own,
Where hast thou been preserved? Where lived? How
Thy father's court? For thou shalt hear that I,
Knowing by Paulina that the oracle
Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
Myself to see the issue.
Lest they desire upon this push to trouble
Your joys with like relation. Go together,
You precious winners all. Your exultation
Partake to everyone. I, an old turtle,
Will wing me to some withered bough and there
My mate, that's never to be found again,
Lament till I am lost.
Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
As I by thine a wife. This is a match,
And made between 's by vows. Thou hast found
But how is to be questioned, for I saw her,
As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many
For him, I partly know his mind--to find thee
An honorable husband.--Come, Camillo,
And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty
Is richly noted and here justified
By us, a pair of kings. Let's from this place.
That e'er I put between your holy looks
My ill suspicion. This your son-in-law
And son unto the King, whom heavens directing,
Is troth-plight to your daughter.--Good Paulina,
Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely
Each one demand and answer to his part
Performed in this wide gap of time since first
We were dissevered. Hastily lead away.
If music be the food of love, play on.
Give me excess of it, that, surfeiting,
The appetite may sicken and so die.
That strain again! It had a dying fall.
That breathes upon a bank of violets,
Stealing and giving odor. Enough; no more.
That, notwithstanding thy capacity
Receiveth as the sea, naught enters there,
Of what validity and pitch soe'er,
But falls into abatement and low price
Even in a minute. So full of shapes is fancy
That it alone is high fantastical.
Will you go hunt, my lord?
Why, so I do, the noblest that I have.
Methought she purged the air of pestilence.
That instant was I turned into a hart,
And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds,
How now, what news from her?
So please my lord, I might not be admitted,
But from her handmaid do return this answer:
The element itself, till seven years' heat,
Shall not behold her face at ample view,
But like a cloistress she will veiled walk,
And water once a day her chamber round
With eye-offending brine--all this to season
And lasting in her sad remembrance.
To pay this debt of love but to a brother,
How will she love when the rich golden shaft
Hath killed the flock of all affections else
That live in her; when liver, brain, and heart,
These sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and filled
Her sweet perfections with one self king!
Away before me to sweet beds of flowers!
Love thoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers.
And what should I do in Illyria?
My brother he is in Elysium.
Perchance he is not drowned.--What think you,
It is perchance that you yourself were saved.
True, madam. And to comfort you with chance,
Assure yourself, after our ship did split,
When you and those poor number saved with you
Hung on our driving boat, I saw your brother,
Most provident in peril, bind himself
To a strong mast that lived upon the sea,
Where, like Arion on the dolphin's back,
So long as I could see.
Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope,
Whereto thy speech serves for authority,
The like of him. Know'st thou this country?
Ay, madam, well, for I was bred and born
Not three hours' travel from this very place.
Orsino. I have heard my father name him.
He was a bachelor then.
And so is now, or was so very late;
For but a month ago I went from hence,
And then 'twas fresh in murmur (as, you know,
What great ones do the less will prattle of)
That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.
That died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her
In the protection of his son, her brother,
Who shortly also died, for whose dear love,
They say, she hath abjured the sight
And company of men.
And might not be delivered to the world
Till I had made mine own occasion mellow,
What my estate is.
Because she will admit no kind of suit,
No, not the Duke's.
There is a fair behavior in thee, captain,
And though that nature with a beauteous wall
Doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee
With this thy fair and outward character.
Conceal me what I am, and be my aid
For such disguise as haply shall become
The form of my intent. I'll serve this duke.
Thou shalt present me as an eunuch to him.
It may be worth thy pains, for I can sing
And speak to him in many sorts of music
That will allow me very worth his service.
What else may hap, to time I will commit.
Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.
Be you his eunuch, and your mute I'll be.
When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.
These clothes are good enough to drink in, and so
He's a very fool and a prodigal.
What dost thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues
Taurus?
Here comes the Count.
Stand you awhile aloof.--Cesario,
Thou know'st no less but all. I have unclasped
To thee the book even of my secret soul.
Therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her.
Be not denied access. Stand at her doors
And tell them, there thy fixed foot shall grow
Till thou have audience.
If she be so abandoned to her sorrow
As it is spoke, she never will admit me.
Be clamorous and leap all civil bounds
Rather than make unprofited return.
Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?
Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith.
It shall become thee well to act my woes.
She will attend it better in thy youth
Than in a nuncio's of more grave aspect.
For they shall yet belie thy happy years
That say thou art a man. Diana's lip
Is not more smooth and rubious, thy small pipe
Is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound,
And all is semblative a womans part.
For this affair.--Some four or five attend him,
All, if you will, for I myself am best
When least in company.--Prosper well in this
And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord,
To call his fortunes thine.
To woo your lady.  Yet a barful strife!
Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife.
Or to be turned away, is not that as good as a
Toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a
Besides, you grow dishonest.
The Lady bade take away the Fool. Therefore, I say
Malvolio. If it be a suit from the Count, I am sick,
He is very well-favored, and he speaks very shrewishly.
One would think his mother's milk were
Let him approach. Call in my gentlewoman.
Give me my veil. Come, throw it o'er my face.
We'll once more hear Orsino's embassy.
Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on.
Lady, you are the cruel'st she alive
If you will lead these graces to the grave
And leave the world no copy.
But if you were the devil you are fair.
My lord and master loves you. O, such love
Could be but recompensed though you were
The nonpareil of beauty.
With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.
Your lord does know my mind. I cannot love him.
Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth;
In voices well divulged, free, learned, and valiant,
And in dimension and the shape of nature
He might have took his answer long ago.
If I did love you in my master's flame,
With such a suff'ring, such a deadly life,
In your denial I would find no sense.
Make me a willow cabin at your gate
And call upon my soul within the house,
Write loyal cantons of contemned love
And sing them loud even in the dead of night,
Hallow your name to the reverberate hills
And make the babbling gossip of the air
Cry out "Olivia!" O, you should not rest
Between the elements of air and earth
But you should pity me.
What is your parentage?
Above my fortunes, yet my state is well.
Unless perchance you come to me again
To tell me how he takes it. Fare you well.
My master, not myself, lacks recompense.
Love make his heart of flint that you shall love,
And let your fervor, like my master's, be
Placed in contempt. Farewell, fair cruelty.	
Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit
Do give thee fivefold blazon. Not too fast! Soft,
Unless the master were the man. How now?
Even so quickly may one catch the plague?
Methinks I feel this youth's perfections
With an invisible and subtle stealth
To creep in at mine eyes. Well, let it be.--
What ho, Malvolio!
Run after that same peevish messenger,
The County's man. He left this ring behind him,
Would I or not. Tell him I'll none of it.
Desire him not to flatter with his lord,
Nor hold him up with hopes. I am not for him.
If that the youth will come this way tomorrow,
Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind.
Fate, show thy force. Ourselves we do not owe.
What is decreed must be, and be this so.
You must know of me, then, Antonio, my name
But though I could not with such estimable
Orsino's court. Farewell.	
The gentleness of all the gods go with thee!
Else would I very shortly see thee there.
But come what may, I do adore thee so
That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.
Olivia?
Fortune forbid my outside have not charmed her!
She made good view of me, indeed so much
That methought her eyes had lost her tongue,
For she did speak in starts distractedly.
She loves me, sure! The cunning of her passion
Invites me in this churlish messenger.
None of my lord's ring? Why, he sent her none!
Poor lady, she were better love a dream.
Disguise, I see thou art a wickedness
Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.
How easy is it for the proper false
In women's waxen hearts to set their forms!
Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we,
For such as we are made of, such we be.
How will this fadge? My master loves her dearly,
And I, poor monster, fond as much on him,
And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me.
What will become of this? As I am man,
My state is desperate for my master's love.
As I am woman ,
What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe!
It is too hard a knot for me t' untie.
Hadst it?
Myrmidons are no bottle-ale houses.
But shall we make the welkin dance indeed? Shall
Knave."
Have you no wit, manners, nor honesty but to
Farewell, dear heart, since I must needs be gone.
His eyes do show his days are almost done.
But I will never die.
Sir Toby, there you lie.
Shall I bid him go?
What an if you do?
Shall I bid him go, and spare not?
Fool make a third, where he shall find the letter.
Observe his construction of it. For this night, to bed,
Give me some music.  Now, good
Now, good Cesario, but that piece of song,
That old and antique song we heard last night.
Methought it did relieve my passion much,
More than light airs and recollected terms
Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times.
Come, but one verse.
Olivia's father took much delight in. He is about
Seek him out  and play the tune the
In the sweet pangs of it remember me,
For such as I am, all true lovers are,
Unstaid and skittish in all motions else
Save in the constant image of the creature
That is beloved. How dost thou like this tune?
It gives a very echo to the seat
Where love is throned.
My life upon 't, young though thou art, thine eye
Hath stayed upon some favor that it loves.
Hath it not, boy?
What kind of woman is 't?
She is not worth thee, then. What years, i' faith?
Too old, by heaven. Let still the woman take
An elder than herself. So wears she to him;
So sways she level in her husband's heart.
For, boy, however we do praise ourselves,
Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm,
More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn,
Than women's are.
Then let thy love be younger than thyself,
Or thy affection cannot hold the bent.
For women are as roses, whose fair flower,
Being once displayed, doth fall that very hour.
And so they are. Alas, that they are so,
To die even when they to perfection grow!
Mark it, Cesario. It is old and plain;
The spinsters and the knitters in the sun
And the free maids that weave their thread with
Do use to chant it. It is silly sooth,
And dallies with the innocence of love
Like the old age.
The Song.
Farewell.	
Let all the rest give place.
Once more, Cesario,
Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty.
Tell her my love, more noble than the world,
Prizes not quantity of dirty lands.
The parts that Fortune hath bestowed upon her,
Tell her, I hold as giddily as Fortune.
But 'tis that miracle and queen of gems
That nature pranks her in attracts my soul.
Say that some lady, as perhaps there is,
Hath for your love as great a pang of heart
As you have for Olivia. You cannot love her;
You tell her so. Must she not then be answered?
Can bide the beating of so strong a passion
As love doth give my heart; no woman's heart
So big, to hold so much; they lack retention.
Alas, their love may be called appetite,
No motion of the liver but the palate,
That suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt;
But mine is all as hungry as the sea,
And can digest as much. Make no compare
Between that love a woman can bear me
And that I owe Olivia.
Too well what love women to men may owe.
In faith, they are as true of heart as we.
My father had a daughter loved a man
As it might be, perhaps, were I a woman,
But let concealment, like a worm i' th' bud,
Feed on her damask cheek. She pined in thought,
And with a green and yellow melancholy
She sat like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed?
We men may say more, swear more, but indeed
Our shows are more than will; for still we prove
Much in our vows but little in our love.
But died thy sister of her love, my boy?
And all the brothers, too--and yet I know not.
Sir, shall I to this lady?
To her in haste. Give her this jewel. Say
My love can give no place, bide no denay.
Andrew?
Strachy married the yeoman of the wardrobe.
Soft. And the impressure her Lucrece, with which
To whom should this be?
Soft, here follows prose.
Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and
And, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast
She thus advises thee that sighs for thee.
Remember who commended thy yellow stockings and
Go to, thou art made, if thou desir'st to be so. If
Farewell. She that would alter services with thee,
The Fortunate-Unhappy.
Daylight and champian discovers not more! This is
She did commend my yellow stockings of late, she
Jove, I thank thee! I will smile. I will do everything
This fellow is wise enough to play the Fool,
And to do that well craves a kind of wit.
He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
The quality of persons, and the time,
And, like the haggard, check at every feather
That comes before his eye. This is a practice
As full of labor as a wise man's art:
For folly that he wisely shows is fit;
But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.
Most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain
Give me your hand, sir.
My duty, madam, and most humble service.
Cesario is your servant's name, fair princess.
My servant, sir? 'Twas never merry world
Since lowly feigning was called compliment.
You're servant to the Count Orsino, youth.
And he is yours, and his must needs be yours.
Your servant's servant is your servant, madam.
For him, I think not on him. For his thoughts,
Would they were blanks rather than filled with me.
Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts
On his behalf.
But would you undertake another suit,
Than music from the spheres.
Give me leave, beseech you. I did send,
After the last enchantment you did here,
Myself, my servant, and, I fear me, you.
Under your hard construction must I sit,
To force that on you in a shameful cunning
Which you knew none of yours. What might you
Have you not set mine honor at the stake
And baited it with all th' unmuzzled thoughts
That tyrannous heart can think? To one of your
Enough is shown. A cypress, not a bosom,
Hides my heart. So, let me hear you speak.
No, not a grize, for 'tis a vulgar proof
That very oft we pity enemies.
Why then methinks 'tis time to smile again.
If one should be a prey, how much the better
To fall before the lion than the wolf.	
The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.
Be not afraid, good youth, I will not have you.
And yet when wit and youth is come to harvest,
Your wife is like to reap a proper man.
There lies your way, due west.
Grace and good disposition attend your Ladyship.
You'll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?
Stay. I prithee, tell me what thou think'st of me.
That you do think you are not what you are.
If I think so, I think the same of you.
Then think you right. I am not what I am.
Would it be better, madam, than I am?
In the contempt and anger of his lip!
Than love that would seem hid. Love's night is
Cesario, by the roses of the spring,
By maidhood, honor, truth, and everything,
Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide.
Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,
For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause;
But rather reason thus with reason fetter:
Love sought is good, but given unsought is better.
By innocence I swear, and by my youth,
And that no woman has, nor never none
Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.
And so adieu, good madam. Nevermore
Will I my master's tears to you deplore.
Yet come again, for thou perhaps mayst move
That heart, which now abhors, to like his love.
Count's servingman than ever she bestowed upon
Noah was a sailor.
This was looked for at your hand, and this was
Let there be gall enough in thy ink, though thou
Christian that means to be saved by believing rightly
He's in yellow stockings.
But, since you make your pleasure of your pains,
More sharp than filed steel, did spur me forth;
And not all love to see you, though so much
As might have drawn one to a longer voyage,
But jealousy what might befall your travel,
Being skill-less in these parts, which to a stranger,
Unguided and unfriended, often prove
Rough and unhospitable. My willing love,
The rather by these arguments of fear,
Set forth in your pursuit.
And thanks, and ever thanks; and oft good turns
Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay.
But were my worth, as is my conscience, firm,
You should find better dealing. What's to do?
Shall we go see the relics of this town?
Tomorrow, sir. Best first go see your lodging.
With the memorials and the things of fame
That do renown this city.
Once in a sea fight 'gainst the Count his galleys
That were I ta'en here it would scarce be answered.
Belike you slew great number of his people?
Th' offense is not of such a bloody nature,
Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel
Might well have given us bloody argument.
It might have since been answered in repaying
What we took from them, which, for traffic's sake,
Most of our city did. Only myself stood out,
For which, if I be lapsed in this place,
It doth not fit me. Hold, sir, here's my purse.
In the south suburbs, at the Elephant,
Is best to lodge. I will bespeak our diet
Whiles you beguile the time and feed your
With viewing of the town. There shall you have me.
Haply your eye shall light upon some toy
You have desire to purchase, and your store,
For an hour.
How shall I feast him? What bestow of him?
For youth is bought more oft than begged or
Where's Malvolio? He is sad and civil
And suits well for a servant with my fortunes.
Where is Malvolio?
He is sure possessed, madam.
Ladyship were best to have some guard about you if
Go call him hither.  I am as mad as he,
If sad and merry madness equal be.
How now, Malvolio?
Orsino's is returned. I could hardly entreat him
Let some of my people have a special care of him. I
And when she went away now, "Let this fellow be
How is 't with you, man?
We must deal gently with him. Let me alone.--How
Read it. I warrant there's vinegar and pepper in 't.
Good.
Andrew Aguecheek.
If this letter move him not, his legs cannot. I'll
And laid mine honor too unchary on 't.
There's something in me that reproves my fault,
But such a headstrong potent fault it is
That it but mocks reproof.
With the same 'havior that your passion bears
Goes on my master's griefs.
Here, wear this jewel for me. 'Tis my picture.
Refuse it not. It hath no tongue to vex you.
And I beseech you come again tomorrow.
What shall you ask of me that I'll deny,
That honor, saved, may upon asking give?
Nothing but this: your true love for my master.
How with mine honor may I give him that
Which I have given to you?
Well, come again tomorrow. Fare thee well.
Capilet.
Put up your sword. If this young gentleman
Have done offense, I take the fault on me.
If you offend him, I for him defy you.
One, sir, that for his love dares yet do more
Than you have heard him brag to you he will.
Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.
Count Orsino.
No, sir, no jot. I know your favor well,
Though now you have no sea-cap on your head.--
Take him away. He knows I know him well.
But there's no remedy. I shall answer it.
What will you do, now my necessity
Makes me to ask you for my purse? It grieves me
Much more for what I cannot do for you
Than what befalls myself. You stand amazed,
But be of comfort.
For the fair kindness you have showed me here,
And part being prompted by your present trouble,
Out of my lean and low ability
Hold, there's half my coffer.	
Is 't possible that my deserts to you
Can lack persuasion? Do not tempt my misery,
Lest that it make me so unsound a man
As to upbraid you with those kindnesses
That I have done for you.
Nor know I you by voice or any feature.
Than lying, vainness, babbling drunkenness,
Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption
Inhabits our frail blood--
Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here
Relieved him with such sanctity of love,
And to his image, which methought did promise
Most venerable worth, did I devotion.
What's that to us? The time goes by. Away!
But O, how vile an idol proves this god!
Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame.
In nature there's no blemish but the mind;
None can be called deformed but the unkind.
Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil
Are empty trunks o'erflourished by the devil.
The man grows mad. Away with him.--Come,
Methinks his words do from such passion fly
That he believes himself; so do not I.
Prove true, imagination, O, prove true,
That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!
He named Sebastian. I my brother know
Yet living in my glass. Even such and so
In favor was my brother, and he went
Still in this fashion, color, ornament,
For him I imitate. O, if it prove,
Tempests are kind, and salt waves fresh in love!
Cesario, nor this is not my nose neither. Nothing
Thou know'st not me.
There's money for thee.  If you
There's for you.	
Come on.
What wouldst thou now?
If thou dar'st tempt me further, draw thy sword.
Hold, Toby! On thy life I charge thee, hold!
Will it be ever thus? Ungracious wretch,
Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves,
Where manners ne'er were preached! Out of my
Be not offended, dear Cesario.--
Rudesby, begone!	
Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway
In this uncivil and unjust extent
Against thy peace. Go with me to my house,
And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks
This ruffian hath botched up, that thou thereby
Mayst smile at this. Thou shalt not choose but go.
Do not deny. Beshrew his soul for me!
He started one poor heart of mine, in thee.
What relish is in this? How runs the stream?
Or I am mad, or else this is a dream.
Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep;
If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep!
Nay, come, I prithee. Would thou 'dst be ruled by
Madam, I will.
The competitors enter.
Prague, that never saw pen and ink, very wittily said
Good Sir Topas, do not think I am mad. They have
Thou shalt hold th' opinion of Pythagoras ere I will
Hey, Robin, jolly Robin,
Tell me how thy lady does.
My lady is unkind, perdy.
Alas, why is she so?
She loves another--
Who calls, ha?
This is the air; that is the glorious sun.
This pearl she gave me, I do feel 't and see 't.
And though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus,
Yet 'tis not madness. Where's Antonio, then?
Yet there he was; and there I found this credit,
That he did range the town to seek me out.
His counsel now might do me golden service.
For though my soul disputes well with my sense
That this may be some error, but no madness,
Yet doth this accident and flood of fortune
So far exceed all instance, all discourse,
That I am ready to distrust mine eyes
And wrangle with my reason that persuades me
To any other trust but that I am mad--
Or else the lady's mad. Yet if 'twere so,
She could not sway her house, command her
Take and give back affairs and their dispatch
With such a smooth, discreet, and stable bearing
As I perceive she does. There's something in 't
That is deceivable. But here the lady comes.
Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well,
Now go with me and with this holy man
Into the chantry by. There, before him
And underneath that consecrated roof,
Plight me the full assurance of your faith,
That my most jealous and too doubtful soul
May live at peace. He shall conceal it
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,
What time we will our celebration keep
According to my birth. What do you say?
And, having sworn truth, ever will be true.
Then lead the way, good father, and heavens so
That they may fairly note this act of mine.
Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?
Just the contrary: the better for thy friends.
Now my foes tell me plainly I am an ass; so that by
Thou shalt not be the worse for me; there's gold.
But, as you say, sir, let your bounty take a nap. I
Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.
That face of his I do remember well.
Yet when I saw it last, it was besmeared
As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war.
For shallow draught and bulk unprizable,
With which such scatheful grapple did he make
With the most noble bottom of our fleet
That very envy and the tongue of loss
Cried fame and honor on him.--What's the matter?
Orsino, this is that Antonio
That took the Phoenix and her fraught from Candy,
And this is he that did the Tiger board
When your young nephew Titus lost his leg.
Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,
In private brabble did we apprehend him.
He did me kindness, sir, drew on my side,
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me.
Notable pirate, thou saltwater thief,
What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies
Whom thou, in terms so bloody and so dear,
Hast made thine enemies?
Be pleased that I shake off these names you give
Antonio never yet was thief or pirate,
Though, I confess, on base and ground enough,
Orsino's enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither.
That most ingrateful boy there by your side
From the rude sea's enraged and foamy mouth
Did I redeem; a wrack past hope he was.
His life I gave him and did thereto add
My love, without retention or restraint,
All his in dedication. For his sake
Did I expose myself, pure for his love,
Into the danger of this adverse town;
Drew to defend him when he was beset;
Where, being apprehended, his false cunning
Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance
And grew a twenty years' removed thing
While one would wink; denied me mine own purse,
Which I had recommended to his use
Not half an hour before.
Today, my lord; and for three months before,
No int'rim, not a minute's vacancy,
Both day and night did we keep company.
Here comes the Countess. Now heaven walks on
Earth!--
But for thee, fellow: fellow, thy words are madness.
Three months this youth hath tended upon me--
But more of that anon.  Take him
What would my lord, but that he may not have,
Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable?--
Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.
What do you say, Cesario?--Good my lord--
My lord would speak; my duty hushes me.
If it be aught to the old tune, my lord,
It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
As howling after music.
Still so cruel?
What, to perverseness? You, uncivil lady,
To whose ingrate and unauspicious altars
My soul the faithful'st off'rings have breathed out
That e'er devotion tendered--what shall I do?
Even what it please my lord that shall become him.
Why should I not, had I the heart to do it,
Like to th' Egyptian thief at point of death,
Kill what I love?--a savage jealousy
That sometime savors nobly. But hear me this:
Since you to nonregardance cast my faith,
And that I partly know the instrument
That screws me from my true place in your favor,
Live you the marble-breasted tyrant still.
But this your minion, whom I know you love,
And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly,
Him will I tear out of that cruel eye
Where he sits crowned in his master's spite.--
Come, boy, with me. My thoughts are ripe in
To spite a raven's heart within a dove.
And I, most jocund, apt, and willingly,
To do you rest a thousand deaths would die.
Where goes Cesario?
More than I love these eyes, more than my life,
More by all mores than e'er I shall love wife.
If I do feign, you witnesses above,
Punish my life for tainting of my love.
Ay me, detested! How am I beguiled!
Who does beguile you? Who does do you wrong?
Hast thou forgot thyself? Is it so long?--
Call forth the holy father.	
Whither, my lord?--Cesario, husband, stay.
Husband?
Her husband, sirrah?
Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear
That makes thee strangle thy propriety.
Fear not, Cesario. Take thy fortunes up.
Be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art
As great as that thou fear'st.
Father, I charge thee by thy reverence
Here to unfold (though lately we intended
To keep in darkness what occasion now
Reveals before 'tis ripe) what thou dost know
Hath newly passed between this youth and me.
Confirmed by mutual joinder of your hands,
Attested by the holy close of lips,
Strengthened by interchangement of your rings,
And all the ceremony of this compact
Sealed in my function, by my testimony;
Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my
When time hath sowed a grizzle on thy case?
Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow
That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow?
Farewell, and take her, but direct thy feet
Where thou and I henceforth may never meet.
My lord, I do protest--
Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.
Toby a bloody coxcomb too. For the love of God,
Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you.
You drew your sword upon me without cause,
But I bespake you fair and hurt you not.
Here comes Sir Toby halting. You shall hear
Get him to bed, and let his hurt be looked to.
But, had it been the brother of my blood,
You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that
Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows
We made each other but so late ago.
One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons!
Antonio, O, my dear Antonio!
How have the hours racked and tortured me
Since I have lost thee!
Sebastian are you?
How have you made division of yourself?
An apple cleft in two is not more twin
Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?
Do I stand there? I never had a brother,
Nor can there be that deity in my nature
Of here and everywhere. I had a sister
Whom the blind waves and surges have devoured.
Of charity, what kin are you to me?
What countryman? What name? What parentage?
Of Messaline. Sebastian was my father.
Such a Sebastian was my brother too.
So went he suited to his watery tomb.
If spirits can assume both form and suit,
You come to fright us.
But am in that dimension grossly clad
Which from the womb I did participate.
Were you a woman, as the rest goes even,
And say "Thrice welcome, drowned Viola."
My father had a mole upon his brow.
And died that day when Viola from her birth
Had numbered thirteen years.
He finished indeed his mortal act
That day that made my sister thirteen years.
If nothing lets to make us happy both
But this my masculine usurped attire,
Do not embrace me till each circumstance
Of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump
That I am Viola; which to confirm,
Where lie my maiden weeds; by whose gentle help
All the occurrence of my fortune since
Hath been between this lady and this lord.
So comes it, lady, you have been mistook.
But nature to her bias drew in that.
You would have been contracted to a maid.
Nor are you therein, by my life, deceived:
You are betrothed both to a maid and man.
Be not amazed; right noble is his blood.
If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,
Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times
Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.
And all those sayings will I overswear,
And all those swearings keep as true in soul
As doth that orbed continent the fire
That severs day from night.
And let me see thee in thy woman's weeds.
The Captain that did bring me first on shore
Hath my maid's garments. He, upon some action,
Is now in durance at Malvolio's suit,
He shall enlarge him.
Fetch Malvolio hither.
And yet, alas, now I remember me,
They say, poor gentleman, he's much distract.
From my remembrance clearly banished his.
Ladyship will have it as it ought to be, you must
Ladyship. I have your own letter that induced me to
The madly used Malvolio.
This savors not much of distraction.
See him delivered, Fabian. Bring him hither.
To think me as well a sister as a wife,
One day shall crown th' alliance on 't, so please
Here at my house, and at my proper cost.
Madam, I am most apt t' embrace your offer.
So much against the mettle of your sex,
So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,
And since you called me "master" for so long,
Here is my hand. You shall from this time be
Your master's mistress.
Is this the madman?
How now, Malvolio?
Notorious wrong.
Lady, you have. Pray you peruse that letter.
You must not now deny it is your hand.
Write from it if you can, in hand or phrase,
Or say 'tis not your seal, not your invention.
You can say none of this. Well, grant it then,
And tell me, in the modesty of honor,
Why you have given me such clear lights of favor?
Bade me come smiling and cross-gartered to you,
To put on yellow stockings, and to frown
Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people?
And, acting this in an obedient hope,
Why have you suffered me to be imprisoned,
Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,
And made the most notorious geck and gull
That e'er invention played on? Tell me why.
Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing,
Though I confess much like the character.
But out of question, 'tis Maria's hand.
And now I do bethink me, it was she
First told me thou wast mad; then cam'st in smiling,
And in such forms which here were presupposed
Upon thee in the letter. Prithee, be content.
This practice hath most shrewdly passed upon thee.
But when we know the grounds and authors of it,
Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge
Of thine own cause.
And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come
Taint the condition of this present hour,
Which I have wondered at. In hope it shall not,
Most freely I confess, myself and Toby
Set this device against Malvolio here,
Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts
We had conceived against him. Maria writ
The letter at Sir Toby's great importance,
In recompense whereof he hath married her.
How with a sportful malice it was followed
May rather pluck on laughter than revenge,
If that the injuries be justly weighed
That have on both sides passed.
Alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee!
He hath been most notoriously abused.
Pursue him and entreat him to a peace.	
He hath not told us of the Captain yet.
When that is known, and golden time convents,
Of our dear souls.--Meantime, sweet sister,
We will not part from hence.--Cesario, come,
For so you shall be while you are a man.
But when in other habits you are seen,
Orsino's mistress, and his fancy's queen.
In Troy there lies the scene. From isles of Greece
The princes orgulous, their high blood chafed,
Have to the port of Athens sent their ships
Fraught with the ministers and instruments
Of cruel war. Sixty and nine, that wore
Their crownets regal, from th' Athenian bay
Put forth toward Phrygia, and their vow is made
To ransack Troy, within whose strong immures
The ravished Helen, Menelaus' queen,
With wanton Paris sleeps; and that's the quarrel.
To Tenedos they come,
And the deep-drawing barks do there disgorge
Their warlike fraughtage. Now on Dardan plains
The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch
Their brave pavilions. Priam's six-gated city--
Dardan and Timbria, Helias, Chetas, Troien,
And Antenorides--with massy staples
And corresponsive and fulfilling bolts,
Spar up the sons of Troy.
Now expectation, tickling skittish spirits
On one and other side, Trojan and Greek,
Sets all on hazard. And hither am I come,
Of author's pen or actor's voice, but suited
In like conditions as our argument,
To tell you, fair beholders, that our play
Leaps o'er the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,
Beginning in the middle, starting thence away
To what may be digested in a play.
Like, or find fault; do as your pleasures are.
Now, good or bad, 'tis but the chance of war.
Call here my varlet; I'll unarm again.
Why should I war without the walls of Troy
That find such cruel battle here within?
Each Trojan that is master of his heart,
Let him to field; Troilus, alas, hath none.
The Greeks are strong and skilful to their strength,
Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness valiant;
But I am weaker than a woman's tear,
Tamer than sleep, fonder than ignorance,
Less valiant than the virgin in the night,
And skilless as unpracticed infancy.
Patience herself, what goddess e'er she be,
Doth lesser blench at suff'rance than I do.
At Priam's royal table do I sit
And when fair Cressid comes into my thoughts--
So, traitor! "When she comes"? When is she
As wedged with a sigh, would rive in twain,
Lest Hector or my father should perceive me,
Buried this sigh in wrinkle of a smile;
But sorrow that is couched in seeming gladness
Is like that mirth fate turns to sudden sadness.
Helen's--well, go to--there were no more comparison
When I do tell thee there my hopes lie drowned,
Reply not in how many fathoms deep
They lie indrenched. I tell thee I am mad
In Cressid's love. Thou answer'st she is fair;
Pourest in the open ulcer of my heart
Her eyes, her hair, her cheek, her gait, her voice;
Handiest in thy discourse--O--that her hand,
In whose comparison all whites are ink
Writing their own reproach, to whose soft seizure
The cygnet's down is harsh, and spirit of sense
Hard as the palm of plowman. This thou tell'st me,
As true thou tell'st me, when I say I love her.
But, saying thus, instead of oil and balm
Thou lay'st in every gash that love hath given me
The knife that made it.
But what care I? I care not an she were a blackamoor;
Peace, you ungracious clamors! Peace, rude sounds!
Fools on both sides! Helen must needs be fair
When with your blood you daily paint her thus.
It is too starved a subject for my sword.
But Pandarus--O gods, how do you plague me!
And he's as tetchy to be wooed to woo
As she is stubborn-chaste against all suit.
Tell me, Apollo, for thy Daphnes love,
What Cressid is, what Pandar, and what we.
Her bed is India; there she lies, a pearl.
Between our Ilium and where she resides,
Let it be called the wild and wand'ring flood,
Ourself the merchant, and this sailing Pandar
Our doubtful hope, our convoy, and our bark.
How now, Prince Troilus? Wherefore not afield?
Because not there. This woman's answer sorts,
For womanish it is to be from thence.
What news, Aeneas, from the field today?
That Paris is returned home, and hurt.
By whom, Aeneas?
Let Paris bleed. 'Tis but a scar to scorn;
Paris is gored with Menelaus' horn.
Hark what good sport is out of town today!
Better at home, if "would I might" were "may."
But to the sport abroad. Are you bound thither?
In all swift haste.
Who were those went by?
And whither go they?
Whose height commands as subject all the vale,
To see the battle. Hector, whose patience
Is as a virtue fixed, today was moved.
He chid Andromache and struck his armorer;
And, like as there were husbandry in war,
Before the sun rose he was harnessed light,
And to the field goes he, where every flower
Did as a prophet weep what it foresaw
In Hector's wrath.
The noise goes, this: there is among the Greeks
They call him Ajax.
They say he is a very man per se
And stands alone.
Was Hector armed and gone ere you came to
Ilium? Helen was not up, was she?
Hector.
Troilus for a copper nose.
Phrygia.
Helen loves Troilus--
Troilus' chin.
Think on 't.
Ilium? Good niece, do, sweet niece Cressida.
Troilus; you shall see anon.
There's a fellow!--Go thy way, Hector!--There's a
There be hacks.
Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris! Look you
Why, this is brave now. Who said he came hurt
Helen's heart good now, ha? Would I could see
Troilus now! You shall see Troilus anon.
That's Helenus. I think he went not forth today.
That's Helenus.
Troilus! There's a man, niece. Hem! Brave Troilus,
Grace, or a daughter a goddess, he should take his
Agamemnon and all Greece.
Have you any eyes? Do you know what a man is? Is
Words, vows, gifts, tears, and love's full sacrifice
He offers in another's enterprise;
But more in Troilus thousandfold I see
Than in the glass of Pandar's praise may be.
Yet hold I off. Women are angels, wooing;
Things won are done; joy's soul lies in the doing.
That she beloved knows naught that knows not this:
Men prize the thing ungained more than it is.
That she was never yet that ever knew
Love got so sweet as when desire did sue.
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach:
Achievement is command; ungained, beseech.
Then though my heart's content firm love doth bear,
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.
Menelaus, with others.]
Princes, what grief hath set the jaundice o'er your
The ample proposition that hope makes
In all designs begun on Earth below
Fails in the promised largeness. Checks and disasters
Grow in the veins of actions highest reared,
As knots, by the conflux of meeting sap,
Infects the sound pine and diverts his grain
Tortive and errant from his course of growth.
Nor, princes, is it matter new to us
That we come short of our suppose so far
That after seven years' siege yet Troy walls stand,
Sith every action that hath gone before,
Whereof we have record, trial did draw
Bias and thwart, not answering the aim
And that unbodied figure of the thought
That gave 't surmised shape. Why then, you princes,
Do you with cheeks abashed behold our works
And call them shames, which are indeed naught else
But the protractive trials of great Jove
To find persistive constancy in men?
The fineness of which metal is not found
In Fortune's love; for then the bold and coward,
The wise and fool, the artist and unread,
The hard and soft seem all affined and kin.
But in the wind and tempest of her frown,
Distinction, with a broad and powerful fan,
Puffing at all, winnows the light away,
And what hath mass or matter by itself
Lies rich in virtue and unmingled.
With due observance of thy godlike seat,
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply
Thy latest words. In the reproof of chance
Lies the true proof of men. The sea being smooth,
How many shallow bauble boats dare sail
Upon her patient breast, making their way
With those of nobler bulk!
But let the ruffian Boreas once enrage
The gentle Thetis, and anon behold
The strong-ribbed bark through liquid mountains cut,
Bounding between the two moist elements,
Like Perseus' horse. Where's then the saucy boat
Whose weak untimbered sides but even now
Corrivaled greatness? Either to harbor fled
Or made a toast for Neptune. Even so
Doth valor's show and valor's worth divide
In storms of Fortune. For in her ray and brightness
The herd hath more annoyance by the breese
Than by the tiger, but when the splitting wind
Makes flexible the knees of knotted oaks,
And flies flee under shade, why, then the thing of
As roused with rage, with rage doth sympathize,
And with an accent tuned in selfsame key
Retorts to chiding Fortune.
Thou great commander, nerves and bone of Greece,
Heart of our numbers, soul and only sprite,
In whom the tempers and the minds of all
Should be shut up, hear what Ulysses speaks.
Besides th' applause and approbation,
The which,  most mighty for thy
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece
Should hold up high in brass; and such again
As venerable Nestor, hatched in silver,
Should with a bond of air, strong as the axletree
On which heaven rides, knit all the Greekish ears
To his experienced tongue, yet let it please both,
Thou great, and wise, to hear Ulysses speak.
Speak, Prince of Ithaca, and be 't of less expect
That matter needless, of importless burden,
Divide thy lips than we are confident
When rank Thersites opes his mastic jaws
We shall hear music, wit, and oracle.
Troy, yet upon his basis, had been down,
And the great Hector's sword had lacked a master
But for these instances:
The specialty of rule hath been neglected,
And look how many Grecian tents do stand
Hollow upon this plain, so many hollow factions.
When that the general is not like the hive
To whom the foragers shall all repair,
What honey is expected? Degree being vizarded,
Th' unworthiest shows as fairly in the mask.
The heavens themselves, the planets, and this center
Observe degree, priority, and place,
Insisture, course, proportion, season, form,
Office, and custom, in all line of order.
And therefore is the glorious planet Sol
In noble eminence enthroned and sphered
Amidst the other, whose med'cinable eye
Corrects the influence of evil planets,
And posts, like the commandment of a king,
Sans check, to good and bad. But when the planets
In evil mixture to disorder wander,
What plagues and what portents, what mutiny,
What raging of the sea, shaking of Earth,
Commotion in the winds, frights, changes, horrors
Divert and crack, rend and deracinate
The unity and married calm of states
Quite from their fixture! O, when degree is shaked,
Which is the ladder of all high designs,
The enterprise is sick. How could communities,
Degrees in schools and brotherhoods in cities,
Peaceful commerce from dividable shores,
The primogeneity and due of birth,
Prerogative of age, crowns, scepters, laurels,
But by degree stand in authentic place?
Take but degree away, untune that string,
And hark what discord follows. Each thing meets
In mere oppugnancy. The bounded waters
Should lift their bosoms higher than the shores
And make a sop of all this solid globe;
Strength should be lord of imbecility,
And the rude son should strike his father dead;
Force should be right, or, rather, right and wrong,
Between whose endless jar justice resides,
Should lose their names, and so should justice too.
Then everything includes itself in power,
Power into will, will into appetite,
And appetite, an universal wolf,
So doubly seconded with will and power,
Must make perforce an universal prey
And last eat up himself. Great Agamemnon,
This chaos, when degree is suffocate,
Follows the choking.
And this neglection of degree it is
That by a pace goes backward, with a purpose
It hath to climb. The General's disdained
By him one step below, he by the next,
That next by him beneath; so every step,
Exampled by the first pace that is sick
Of his superior, grows to an envious fever
Of pale and bloodless emulation.
And 'tis this fever that keeps Troy on foot,
Not her own sinews. To end a tale of length,
Troy in our weakness stands, not in her strength.
Most wisely hath Ulysses here discovered
The fever whereof all our power is sick.
The nature of the sickness found, Ulysses,
What is the remedy?
The great Achilles, whom opinion crowns
The sinew and the forehand of our host,
Having his ear full of his airy fame,
Grows dainty of his worth and in his tent
Lies mocking our designs. With him Patroclus,
Upon a lazy bed, the live-long day
Breaks scurril jests,
And with ridiculous and silly action,
Which, slanderer, he imitation calls,
He pageants us. Sometime, great Agamemnon,
Thy topless deputation he puts on,
And, like a strutting player whose conceit
Lies in his hamstring and doth think it rich
To hear the wooden dialogue and sound
Such to-be-pitied and o'erwrested seeming
He acts thy greatness in; and when he speaks,
Which from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropped
Would seem hyperboles. At this fusty stuff,
The large Achilles, on his pressed bed lolling,
From his deep chest laughs out a loud applause,
Cries "Excellent! 'Tis Agamemnon right.
Now play me Nestor; hem and stroke thy beard,
As he being dressed to some oration."
That's done, as near as the extremest ends
Of parallels, as like as Vulcan and his wife;
Yet god Achilles still cries "Excellent!
Arming to answer in a night alarm."
And then, forsooth, the faint defects of age
Must be the scene of mirth--to cough and spit,
And, with a palsy fumbling on his gorget,
Shake in and out the rivet. And at this sport
Sir Valor dies, cries "O, enough, Patroclus,
Or give me ribs of steel! I shall split all
In pleasure of my spleen." And in this fashion,
All our abilities, gifts, natures, shapes,
Severals and generals of grace exact,
Achievements, plots, orders, preventions,
Excitements to the field, or speech for truce,
Success or loss, what is or is not, serves
As stuff for these two to make paradoxes.
And in the imitation of these twain,
Who, as Ulysses says, opinion crowns
With an imperial voice, many are infect:
Ajax is grown self-willed and bears his head
In such a rein, in full as proud a place
As broad Achilles; keeps his tent like him,
Makes factious feasts; rails on our state of war,
Bold as an oracle, and sets Thersites--
To match us in comparisons with dirt,
To weaken and discredit our exposure,
How rank soever rounded in with danger.
They tax our policy and call it cowardice,
Count wisdom as no member of the war,
Forestall prescience, and esteem no act
But that of hand. The still and mental parts
That do contrive how many hands shall strike
When fitness calls them on and know by measure
Of their observant toil the enemy's weight--
Why, this hath not a fingers dignity.
They call this bed-work, mapp'ry, closet war;
So that the ram that batters down the wall,
For the great swinge and rudeness of his poise,
They place before his hand that made the engine
Or those that with the fineness of their souls
By reason guide his execution.
Let this be granted, and Achilles' horse
Makes many Thetis' sons.	
Is this great Agamemnon's tent, I pray you?
May one that is a herald and a prince
Do a fair message to his kingly eyes?
With surety stronger than Achilles' arm
Call Agamemnon head and general.
Fair leave and large security. How may
Know them from eyes of other mortals?
Ay. I ask that I might waken reverence
And bid the cheek be ready with a blush
Modest as morning when she coldly eyes
The youthful Phoebus.
Which is that god in office, guiding men?
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?
This Trojan scorns us, or the men of Troy
Are ceremonious courtiers.
Courtiers as free, as debonair, unarmed,
As bending angels--that's their fame in peace.
But when they would seem soldiers, they have galls,
Good arms, strong joints, true swords, and--great
Jove's accord--
Nothing so full of heart. But peace, Aeneas.
Peace, Trojan. Lay thy finger on thy lips.
The worthiness of praise distains his worth
If that the praised himself bring the praise forth.
But what the repining enemy commends,
That breath fame blows; that praise, sole pure,
Sir, you of Troy, call you yourself Aeneas?
Sir, pardon. 'Tis for Agamemnon's ears.
He hears naught privately that comes from Troy.
Nor I from Troy come not to whisper with him.
To set his sense on the attentive bent,
And then to speak.
It is not Agamemnon's sleeping hour.
That thou shalt know, Trojan, he is awake,
He tells thee so himself.
Send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents;
And every Greek of mettle, let him know
What Troy means fairly shall be spoke aloud.
We have, great Agamemnon, here in Troy
Who in this dull and long-continued truce
Is resty grown. He bade me take a trumpet
And to this purpose speak: "Kings, princes, lords,
If there be one among the fair'st of Greece
That holds his honor higher than his ease,
That seeks his praise more than he fears his peril,
That knows his valor and knows not his fear,
That loves his mistress more than in confession
With truant vows to her own lips he loves
And dare avow her beauty and her worth
In other arms than hers--to him this challenge.
Hector, in view of Trojans and of Greeks,
Shall make it good, or do his best to do it,
He hath a lady wiser, fairer, truer
Than ever Greek did couple in his arms
And will tomorrow with his trumpet call,
Midway between your tents and walls of Troy,
To rouse a Grecian that is true in love.
If any come, Hector shall honor him;
If none, he'll say in Troy when he retires
The Grecian dames are sunburnt and not worth
The splinter of a lance." Even so much.
This shall be told our lovers, Lord Aeneas.
If none of them have soul in such a kind,
We left them all at home. But we are soldiers,
And may that soldier a mere recreant prove
That means not, hath not, or is not in love!
If then one is, or hath, or means to be,
That one meets Hector. If none else, I am he.
Tell him of Nestor, one that was a man
When Hector's grandsire sucked. He is old now,
But if there be not in our Grecian host
To answer for his love, tell him from me
And in my vambrace put my withered brawns
And, meeting him, will tell him that my lady
Was fairer than his grandam and as chaste
As may be in the world. His youth in flood,
Now heavens forfend such scarcity of youth!
Fair Lord Aeneas, let me touch your hand.
To our pavilion shall I lead you, sir.
Achilles shall have word of this intent;
So shall each lord of Greece from tent to tent.
Yourself shall feast with us before you go,
And find the welcome of a noble foe.
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.
Blunt wedges rive hard knots; the seeded pride
That hath to this maturity blown up
In rank Achilles must or now be cropped
Or, shedding, breed a nursery of like evil
To overbulk us all.
This challenge that the gallant Hector sends,
However it is spread in general name,
Relates in purpose only to Achilles.
True. The purpose is perspicuous as substance
Whose grossness little characters sum up;
And, in the publication, make no strain
But that Achilles, were his brain as barren
As banks of Libya--though, Apollo knows,
Ay, with celerity, find Hector's purpose
Pointing on him.
Why, 'tis most meet. Who may you else oppose
That can from Hector bring his honor off
If not Achilles? Though 't be a sportful combat,
Yet in the trial much opinion dwells,
For here the Trojans taste our dear'st repute
With their fin'st palate. And, trust to me, Ulysses,
Our imputation shall be oddly poised
In this vile action. For the success,
Although particular, shall give a scantling
Of good or bad unto the general;
And in such indexes, although small pricks
To their subsequent volumes, there is seen
The baby figure of the giant mass
Of things to come at large. It is supposed
He that meets Hector issues from our choice;
And choice, being mutual act of all our souls,
Makes merit her election and doth boil,
As 'twere from forth us all, a man distilled
Out of our virtues, who, miscarrying,
What heart receives from hence a conquering part
To steel a strong opinion to themselves?--
Which entertained, limbs are his instruments,
In no less working than are swords and bows
Directive by the limbs.
Give pardon to my speech: therefore 'tis meet
Achilles meet not Hector. Let us like merchants
First show foul wares and think perchance they'll sell;
If not, the luster of the better shall exceed
By showing the worse first. Do not consent
That ever Hector and Achilles meet,
For both our honor and our shame in this
Are dogged with two strange followers.
What glory our Achilles shares from Hector,
Were he not proud, we all should share with him;
But he already is too insolent,
And it were better parch in Afric sun
Than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes
Should he scape Hector fair. If he were foiled,
Why then we do our main opinion crush
In taint of our best man. No, make a lott'ry,
And, by device, let blockish Ajax draw
The sort to fight with Hector. Among ourselves
Give him allowance for the better man,
For that will physic the great Myrmidon,
Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall
His crest that prouder than blue Iris bends.
If the dull brainless Ajax come safe off,
We'll dress him up in voices; if he fail,
Yet go we under our opinion still
That we have better men. But, hit or miss,
Our project's life this shape of sense assumes:
Ajax employed plucks down Achilles' plumes.
Now, Ulysses, I begin to relish thy advice,
And I will give a taste thereof forthwith
To Agamemnon. Go we to him straight.
Two curs shall tame each other; pride alone
Must tar the mastiffs on, as 'twere a bone.
Achilles, and thou art as full of envy at his greatness
Thou art here but to thrash Trojans, and thou art
His evasions have ears thus long. I have
This lord, Achilles--Ajax, who wears his wit in his
Marry, this, sir, is proclaimed through all our host:
That Hector, by the fifth hour of the sun,
Will with a trumpet 'twixt our tents and Troy
Tomorrow morning call some knight to arms
That hath a stomach, and such a one that dare
Maintain--I know not what; 'tis trash. Farewell.
He knew his man.	
After so many hours, lives, speeches spent,
Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks:
As honor, loss of time, travel, expense,
Wounds, friends, and what else dear that is consumed
In hot digestion of this cormorant war--
Shall be struck off."--Hector, what say you to 't?
Though no man lesser fears the Greeks than I
As far as toucheth my particular,
Yet, dread Priam,
There is no lady of more softer bowels,
More spongy to suck in the sense of fear,
More ready to cry out "Who knows what follows?"
Than Hector is. The wound of peace is surety,
Surety secure; but modest doubt is called
The beacon of the wise, the tent that searches
To th' bottom of the worst. Let Helen go.
Since the first sword was drawn about this question,
Every tithe soul, 'mongst many thousand dismes,
Hath been as dear as Helen; I mean, of ours.
If we have lost so many tenths of ours
To guard a thing not ours--nor worth to us,
Had it our name, the value of one ten--
What merit's in that reason which denies
The yielding of her up?
Weigh you the worth and honor of a king
So great as our dread father's in a scale
Of common ounces? Will you with counters sum
The past-proportion of his infinite,
And buckle in a waist most fathomless
With spans and inches so diminutive
As fears and reasons? Fie, for godly shame!
No marvel though you bite so sharp at reasons,
You are so empty of them. Should not our father
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reason,
Because your speech hath none that tell him so?
You are for dreams and slumbers, brother priest.
You fur your gloves with reason. Here are your
You know an enemy intends you harm;
You know a sword employed is perilous,
And reason flies the object of all harm.
Who marvels, then, when Helenus beholds
The very wings of reason to his heels
And fly like chidden Mercury from Jove
Or like a star disorbed? Nay, if we talk of reason,
Let's shut our gates and sleep. Manhood and honor
Should have hare hearts, would they but fat their
With this crammed reason. Reason and respect
Make livers pale and lustihood deject.
Brother, she is not worth what she doth cost
The keeping.
But value dwells not in particular will;
It holds his estimate and dignity
As well wherein 'tis precious of itself
As in the prizer. 'Tis mad idolatry
To make the service greater than the god;
And the will dotes that is attributive
To what infectiously itself affects
Without some image of th' affected merit.
Is led on in the conduct of my will--
My will enkindled by mine eyes and ears,
Two traded pilots 'twixt the dangerous shores
Of will and judgment. How may I avoid,
Although my will distaste what it elected,
The wife I choose? There can be no evasion
To blench from this and to stand firm by honor.
We turn not back the silks upon the merchant
When we have soiled them, nor the remainder
We do not throw in unrespective sieve
Because we now are full. It was thought meet
Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks.
Your breath with full consent bellied his sails;
The seas and winds, old wranglers, took a truce
And did him service. He touched the ports desired,
And for an old aunt whom the Greeks held captive,
He brought a Grecian queen, whose youth and
Wrinkles Apollo's and makes pale the morning.
Why keep we her? The Grecians keep our aunt.
Is she worth keeping? Why, she is a pearl
Whose price hath launched above a thousand ships
And turned crowned kings to merchants.
If you'll avouch 'twas wisdom Paris went--
As you must needs, for you all cried "Go, go"--
If you'll confess he brought home worthy prize--
As you must needs, for you all clapped your hands
And cried "Inestimable"--why do you now
The issue of your proper wisdoms rate
And do a deed that never Fortune did,
Beggar the estimation which you prized
Richer than sea and land? O, theft most base,
That we have stol'n what we do fear to keep!
But thieves unworthy of a thing so stol'n,
That in their country did them that disgrace
We fear to warrant in our native place.
Cry, Trojans, cry!
Cry, Trojans, cry! Lend me ten thousand eyes,
And I will fill them with prophetic tears.
Virgins and boys, mid-age and wrinkled elders,
Soft infancy, that nothing canst but cry,
Add to my clamors. Let us pay betimes
Cry, Trojans, cry! Practice your eyes with tears.
Troy must not be, nor goodly Ilium stand.
Our firebrand brother Paris burns us all.
Cry, Trojans, cry! A Helen and a woe!
Cry, cry! Troy burns, or else let Helen go.	
Now, youthful Troilus, do not these high strains
Of divination in our sister work
Some touches of remorse? Or is your blood
So madly hot that no discourse of reason
Nor fear of bad success in a bad cause
Can qualify the same?
We may not think the justness of each act
Such and no other than event doth form it,
Nor once deject the courage of our minds
Because Cassandra's mad. Her brainsick raptures
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel
Which hath our several honors all engaged
To make it gracious. For my private part,
And Jove forbid there should be done amongst us
Such things as might offend the weakest spleen
To fight for and maintain!
Else might the world convince of levity
As well my undertakings as your counsels.
But I attest the gods, your full consent
Gave wings to my propension and cut off
All fears attending on so dire a project.
For what, alas, can these my single arms?
What propugnation is in one man's valor
To stand the push and enmity of those
This quarrel would excite? Yet, I protest,
Were I alone to pass the difficulties
And had as ample power as I have will,
Paris should ne'er retract what he hath done
Nor faint in the pursuit.
Like one besotted on your sweet delights.
You have the honey still, but these the gall.
So to be valiant is no praise at all.
Sir, I propose not merely to myself
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it,
But I would have the soil of her fair rape
Wiped off in honorable keeping her.
What treason were it to the ransacked queen,
Disgrace to your great worths, and shame to me,
Now to deliver her possession up
On terms of base compulsion? Can it be
That so degenerate a strain as this
Should once set footing in your generous bosoms?
There's not the meanest spirit on our party
Without a heart to dare or sword to draw
When Helen is defended, nor none so noble
Whose life were ill bestowed or death unfamed
Where Helen is the subject. Then I say,
Well may we fight for her whom, we know well,
The world's large spaces cannot parallel.
Paris and Troilus, you have both said well,
And on the cause and question now in hand
Have glozed--but superficially, not much
Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought
Unfit to hear moral philosophy.
The reasons you allege do more conduce
To the hot passion of distempered blood
Than to make up a free determination
Have ears more deaf than adders to the voice
Of any true decision. Nature craves
All dues be rendered to their owners. Now,
What nearer debt in all humanity
Than wife is to the husband? If this law
Of nature be corrupted through affection,
And that great minds, of partial indulgence
To their benumbed wills, resist the same,
There is a law in each well-ordered nation
To curb those raging appetites that are
Most disobedient and refractory.
If Helen, then, be wife to Sparta's king,
As it is known she is, these moral laws
Of nature and of nations speak aloud
To have her back returned. Thus to persist
In doing wrong extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heavy. Hector's opinion
Is this in way of truth; yet, ne'ertheless,
My sprightly brethren, I propend to you
In resolution to keep Helen still,
For 'tis a cause that hath no mean dependence
Upon our joint and several dignities.
Why, there you touched the life of our design!
Were it not glory that we more affected
Than the performance of our heaving spleens,
Spent more in her defense. But, worthy Hector,
She is a theme of honor and renown,
Whose present courage may beat down our foes,
And fame in time to come canonize us;
For I presume brave Hector would not lose
So rich advantage of a promised glory
As smiles upon the forehead of this action
For the wide world's revenue.
You valiant offspring of great Priamus.
The dull and factious nobles of the Greeks
Will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits.
Whilst emulation in the army crept.
This, I presume, will wake him.
For that, methinks, is the curse depending
Thersites, come in and rail.
But it is no matter. Thyself upon thyself! The
Where's Achilles?
Patroclus, what's Achilles?
Patroclus' knower, and Patroclus is a fool.
Thersites.
Thersites is a fool, and, as aforesaid, Patroclus is a
Achilles, Achilles is a fool to be commanded of
Agamemnon, Thersites is a fool to serve such a fool,
Diomedes, Ajax, and Calchas.]
Look you, who comes here?
Within his tent, but ill-disposed, my lord.
Let it be known to him that we are here.
He shent our messengers, and we lay by
Our appertainments, visiting of him.
Let him be told so, lest perchance he think
We dare not move the question of our place
Or know not what we are.
We saw him at the opening of his tent.
He is not sick.
Here comes Patroclus.
Achilles bids me say he is much sorry
If anything more than your sport and pleasure
Did move your greatness and this noble state
To call upon him. He hopes it is no other
But for your health and your digestion sake,
An after-dinner's breath.
We are too well acquainted with these answers,
But his evasion, winged thus swift with scorn,
Cannot outfly our apprehensions.
Much attribute he hath, and much the reason
Why we ascribe it to him. Yet all his virtues,
Not virtuously on his own part beheld,
Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss,
Yea, and like fair fruit in an unwholesome dish,
Are like to rot untasted. Go and tell him
We come to speak with him; and you shall not sin
If you do say we think him overproud
And underhonest, in self-assumption greater
Than in the note of judgment; and worthier than
Here tend the savage strangeness he puts on,
Disguise the holy strength of their command,
And underwrite in an observing kind
His humorous predominance--yea, watch
His course and time, his ebbs and flows, as if
The passage and whole carriage of this action
Rode on his tide. Go tell him this, and add
That, if he overhold his price so much,
We'll none of him. But let him, like an engine
Not portable, lie under this report:
Before a sleeping giant. Tell him so.
In second voice we'll not be satisfied;
We come to speak with him.--Ulysses, enter you.
Pride is his own glass, his own trumpet, his own
And yet he loves himself. Is 't not strange?
Achilles will not to the field tomorrow.
What's his excuse?
But carries on the stream of his dispose,
Without observance or respect of any,
In will peculiar and in self-admission.
Why, will he not, upon our fair request,
Untent his person and share th' air with us?
Things small as nothing, for request's sake only,
He makes important. Possessed he is with greatness
And speaks not to himself but with a pride
That quarrels at self-breath. Imagined worth
Holds in his blood such swoll'n and hot discourse
That 'twixt his mental and his active parts
Kingdomed Achilles in commotion rages
And batters down himself. What should I say?
He is so plaguy proud that the death-tokens of it
Cry "No recovery."
Dear lord, go you and greet him in his tent.
At your request a little from himself.
We'll consecrate the steps that Ajax makes
When they go from Achilles. Shall the proud lord
That bastes his arrogance with his own seam
And never suffers matter of the world
Enter his thoughts, save such as doth revolve
And ruminate himself--shall he be worshipped
Of that we hold an idol more than he?
No. This thrice-worthy and right valiant lord
Shall not so stale his palm, nobly acquired,
Nor, by my will, assubjugate his merit,
As amply titled as Achilles is,
By going to Achilles.
That were to enlard his fat-already pride
And add more coals to Cancer when he burns
With entertaining great Hyperion.
This lord go to him? Jupiter forbid
And say in thunder "Achilles, go to him."
And how his silence drinks up this applause!
If I go to him, with my armed fist
An he be proud with me, I'll feeze his pride.
Let me go to him.
Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel.
My lord, you feed too much on this dislike.
Our noble general, do not do so.
You must prepare to fight without Achilles.
Why, 'tis this naming of him does him harm.
Here is a man--but 'tis before his face;
He is not emulous, as Achilles is.
Know the whole world, he is as valiant--
Would he were a Trojan!
Thank the heavens, lord, thou art of sweet
Praise him that gat thee, she that gave thee suck;
Famed be thy tutor, and thy parts of nature
Thrice famed beyond, beyond thy erudition;
But he that disciplined thine arms to fight,
Let Mars divide eternity in twain
And give him half; and for thy vigor,
Bull-bearing Milo his addition yield
To sinewy Ajax. I will not praise thy wisdom,
Which like a bourn, a pale, a shore confines
Thy spacious and dilated parts. Here's Nestor,
Instructed by the antiquary times;
He must, he is, he cannot but be wise.--
But pardon, father Nestor, were your days
As green as Ajax' and your brain so tempered,
You should not have the eminence of him,
But be as Ajax.
Ay, my good son.
There is no tarrying here; the hart Achilles
Keeps thicket. Please it our great general
To call together all his state of war.
Fresh kings are come to Troy. Tomorrow
We must with all our main of power stand fast.
And here's a lord--come knights from east to west
And cull their flower, Ajax shall cope the best.
Go we to council. Let Achilles sleep.
Light boats sail swift, though greater hulks draw deep.
Servingman.]
Pandarus.
Paris my lord, who is there in person; with him the
My lord, will you vouchsafe me a word?
Come, your disposer is sick.
No, your poor disposer's sick.
Now, sweet queen.
Paris.
Is love a generation of vipers? Sweet lord, who's
Lord Pandarus.
They're come from the field. Let us to Priam's hall
To greet the warriors. Sweet Helen, I must woo you
To help unarm our Hector. His stubborn buckles,
With these your white enchanting fingers touched,
Shall more obey than to the edge of steel
Or force of Greekish sinews. You shall do more
Than all the island kings: disarm great Hector.
Yea, what he shall receive of us in duty
Gives us more palm in beauty than we have,
Yea, overshines ourself.
No, Pandarus. I stalk about her door
Like a strange soul upon the Stygian banks
Staying for waftage. O, be thou my Charon,
And give me swift transportance to those fields
Where I may wallow in the lily beds
Proposed for the deserver! O, gentle Pandar,
From Cupid's shoulder pluck his painted wings
And fly with me to Cressid!
Th' imaginary relish is so sweet
That it enchants my sense. What will it be
When that the wat'ry palate taste indeed
Love's thrice-repured nectar? Death, I fear me,
Swooning destruction, or some joy too fine,
Too subtle-potent, tuned too sharp in sweetness
For the capacity of my ruder powers.
That I shall lose distinction in my joys,
As doth a battle when they charge on heaps
The enemy flying.
You must be witty now. She does so blush and
Even such a passion doth embrace my bosom.
My heart beats thicker than a feverous pulse,
And all my powers do their bestowing lose,
Like vassalage at unawares encount'ring
The eye of majesty.
You must be watched ere you be made tame, must
Alas the day, how loath you are to offend daylight!
An 'twere dark, you'd close sooner.--So, so, rub on,
Cupid's pageant there is presented no monster.
Troilus shall be such to Cressid as what envy can
Boldness comes to me now and brings me heart.
Prince Troilus, I have loved you night and day
For many weary months.
Why was my Cressid then so hard to win?
Hard to seem won; but I was won, my lord,
With the first glance that ever--pardon me;
If I confess much, you will play the tyrant.
But I might master it. In faith, I lie;
My thoughts were like unbridled children grown
Too headstrong for their mother. See, we fools!
Why have I blabbed? Who shall be true to us
When we are so unsecret to ourselves?
But though I loved you well, I wooed you not;
And yet, good faith, I wished myself a man;
Or that we women had men's privilege
Of speaking first. Sweet, bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture I shall surely speak
The thing I shall repent. See, see, your silence,
Cunning in dumbness, from my weakness draws
My very soul of counsel! Stop my mouth.
And shall, albeit sweet music issues thence.
My lord, I do beseech you pardon me.
For this time will I take my leave, my lord.
But an unkind self that itself will leave
To be another's fool. I would be gone.
Where is my wit? I know not what I speak.
Well know they what they speak that speak so wisely.
Perchance, my lord, I show more craft than love
And fell so roundly to a large confession
To angle for your thoughts. But you are wise,
Or else you love not; for to be wise and love
Exceeds man's might. That dwells with gods above.
As, if it can, I will presume in you--
To feed for aye her lamp and flames of love,
To keep her constancy in plight and youth,
Outliving beauty's outward, with a mind
That doth renew swifter than blood decays!
Or that persuasion could but thus convince me
That my integrity and truth to you
Might be affronted with the match and weight
Of such a winnowed purity in love;
How were I then uplifted! But, alas,
And simpler than the infancy of truth.
In that I'll war with you.
When right with right wars who shall be most right!
True swains in love shall in the world to come
Approve their truth by Troilus. When their rhymes,
Full of protest, of oath and big compare,
Wants similes, truth tired with iteration--
As sun to day, as turtle to her mate,
As iron to adamant, as Earth to th' center"--
Yet, after all comparisons of truth,
As truth's authentic author to be cited,
And sanctify the numbers.
If I be false or swerve a hair from truth,
When time is old and hath forgot itself,
When water drops have worn the stones of Troy
And blind oblivion swallowed cities up,
And mighty states characterless are grated
To dusty nothing, yet let memory,
From false to false, among false maids in love,
Upbraid my falsehood! When they've said "as false
As air, as water, wind or sandy earth,
As fox to lamb, or wolf to heifer's calf,
Pard to the hind, or stepdame to her son,"
Yea, let them say, to stick the heart of falsehood,
Away.	
And Cupid grant all tongue-tied maidens here
Bed, chamber, pander to provide this gear.
Agamemnon, Calchas, Menelaus, and Ajax.]
Now, princes, for the service I have done you,
Th' advantage of the time prompts me aloud
To call for recompense. Appear it to your mind
That, through the sight I bear in things to come,
Incurred a traitor's name, exposed myself,
From certain and possessed conveniences,
To doubtful fortunes, sequest'ring from me all
That time, acquaintance, custom, and condition
Made tame and most familiar to my nature,
And here, to do you service, am become
As new into the world, strange, unacquainted.
To give me now a little benefit
Out of those many regist'red in promise,
Which you say live to come in my behalf.
What wouldst thou of us, Trojan, make demand?
You have a Trojan prisoner called Antenor
Yesterday took. Troy holds him very dear.
Oft have you--often have you thanks therefor--
Desired my Cressid in right great exchange,
Whom Troy hath still denied; but this Antenor,
That their negotiations all must slack,
Wanting his manage; and they will almost
Give us a prince of blood, a son of Priam,
In change of him. Let him be sent, great princes,
And he shall buy my daughter; and her presence
Shall quite strike off all service I have done
In most accepted pain.
And bring us Cressid hither. Calchas shall have
What he requests of us. Good Diomed,
Furnish you fairly for this interchange.
Withal, bring word if Hector will tomorrow
Be answered in his challenge. Ajax is ready.
This shall I undertake, and 'tis a burden
Which I am proud to bear.	
Achilles stands i' th' entrance of his tent.
Please it our General pass strangely by him
As if he were forgot, and, princes all,
Lay negligent and loose regard upon him.
Why such unplausive eyes are bent, why turned on
If so, I have derision medicinable
To use between your strangeness and his pride,
Which his own will shall have desire to drink.
It may do good; pride hath no other glass
To show itself but pride, for supple knees
Feed arrogance and are the proud man's fees.
We'll execute your purpose and put on
So do each lord, and either greet him not
Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more
Than if not looked on. I will lead the way.
What, comes the General to speak with me?
You know my mind: I'll fight no more 'gainst Troy.
What says Achilles? Would he aught with us?
Would you, my lord, aught with the General?
What mean these fellows? Know they not Achilles?
They pass by strangely. They were used to bend,
To send their smiles before them to Achilles,
To come as humbly as they use to creep
To holy altars.
Must fall out with men too. What the declined is
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others
As feel in his own fall, for men, like butterflies,
Show not their mealy wings but to the summer,
And not a man, for being simply man,
Hath any honor, but honor for those honors
That are without him--as place, riches, and favor,
Prizes of accident as oft as merit,
Which, when they fall, as being slippery slanders,
The love that leaned on them, as slippery too,
Doth one pluck down another and together
Die in the fall. But 'tis not so with me.
Fortune and I are friends. I do enjoy,
At ample point, all that I did possess,
Save these men's looks, who do, methinks, find out
Something not worth in me such rich beholding
As they have often given. Here is Ulysses.
Writes me that man, how dearly ever parted,
How much in having, or without or in,
Cannot make boast to have that which he hath,
Nor feels not what he owes, but by reflection;
As when his virtues, shining upon others,
Heat them, and they retort that heat again
To the first giver.
The beauty that is borne here in the face
The bearer knows not, but commends itself
To others' eyes; nor doth the eye itself,
That most pure spirit of sense, behold itself,
Not going from itself, but eye to eye opposed
Salutes each other with each other's form.
For speculation turns not to itself
Till it hath traveled and is mirrored there
Where it may see itself. This is not strange at all.
It is familiar--but at the author's drift,
Who in his circumstance expressly proves
That no man is the lord of anything--
Though in and of him there be much consisting--
Till he communicate his parts to others;
Nor doth he of himself know them for aught
Till he behold them formed in the applause
Where they're extended; who, like an arch, reverb'rate
The voice again or, like a gate of steel
Fronting the sun, receives and renders back
His figure and his heat. I was much rapt in this
And apprehended here immediately
Th' unknown Ajax. Heavens, what a man is there!
Nature, what things there are
Most abject in regard, and dear in use,
What things again most dear in the esteem
And poor in worth! Now shall we see tomorrow--
An act that very chance doth throw upon him--
Ajax renowned. O, heavens, what some men do
While some men leave to do!
How some men creep in skittish Fortune's hall,
Whiles others play the idiots in her eyes!
How one man eats into another's pride,
While pride is fasting in his wantonness!
To see these Grecian lords--why, even already
They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder
As if his foot were on brave Hector's breast
And great Troy shrieking.
As misers do by beggars, neither gave to me
Good word nor look. What, are my deeds forgot?
Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion,
Those scraps are good deeds past, which are devoured
As fast as they are made, forgot as soon
As done. Perseverance, dear my lord,
Keeps honor bright. To have done is to hang
Quite out of fashion like a rusty mail
In monumental mock'ry. Take the instant way,
For honor travels in a strait so narrow
Where one but goes abreast. Keep, then, the path,
For Emulation hath a thousand sons
That one by one pursue. If you give way
Or turn aside from the direct forthright,
Like to an entered tide they all rush by
And leave you hindmost;
Or, like a gallant horse fall'n in first rank,
Lie there for pavement to the abject rear,
Though less than yours in past, must o'ertop yours;
For Time is like a fashionable host
That slightly shakes his parting guest by th' hand
And, with his arms outstretched as he would fly,
Grasps in the comer. Welcome ever smiles,
And Farewell goes out sighing. Let not virtue seek
Remuneration for the thing it was,
For beauty, wit,
High birth, vigor of bone, desert in service,
Love, friendship, charity are subjects all
To envious and calumniating Time.
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin,
That all, with one consent, praise newborn gauds,
Though they are made and molded of things past,
And give to dust that is a little gilt
More laud than gilt o'erdusted.
The present eye praises the present object.
Then marvel not, thou great and complete man,
That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax,
Since things in motion sooner catch the eye
Than what stirs not. The cry went once on thee,
And still it might, and yet it may again,
If thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive
And case thy reputation in thy tent,
Whose glorious deeds but in these fields of late
Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves
And drave great Mars to faction.
The reasons are more potent and heroical.
With one of Priam's daughters.
The providence that's in a watchful state
Knows almost every grain of Pluto's gold,
Finds bottom in the uncomprehensive deep,
Keeps place with thought and almost, like the gods,
Do thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles.
There is a mystery--with whom relation
Durst never meddle--in the soul of state,
Which hath an operation more divine
Than breath or pen can give expressure to.
All the commerce that you have had with Troy
As perfectly is ours as yours, my lord;
And better would it fit Achilles much
To throw down Hector than Polyxena.
But it must grieve young Pyrrhus now at home
When Fame shall in our islands sound her trump,
And all the Greekish girls shall tripping sing
But our great Ajax bravely beat down him."
Farewell, my lord. I as your lover speak.
The fool slides o'er the ice that you should break.
To this effect, Achilles, have I moved you.
Is not more loathed than an effeminate man
In time of action. I stand condemned for this.
They think my little stomach to the war,
And your great love to me, restrains you thus.
Sweet, rouse yourself, and the weak wanton Cupid
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fold
And, like a dewdrop from the lion's mane,
Be shook to air.
Ay, and perhaps receive much honor by him.
My fame is shrewdly gored.
Those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves.
Omission to do what is necessary
Seals a commission to a blank of danger,
And danger, like an ague, subtly taints
Even then when they sit idly in the sun.
Go call Thersites hither, sweet Patroclus.
To see us here unarmed. I have a woman's longing,
An appetite that I am sick withal,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace,
To talk with him, and to behold his visage,
Even to my full of view.
Thersites.
Let Patroclus make his demands to me. You
Hector to his tent--
Agamemnon.
My mind is troubled, like a fountain stirred,
And I myself see not the bottom of it.
Grecians with torches.]
Had I so good occasion to lie long
As you, Prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business
Should rob my bedmate of my company.
That's my mind too.--Good morrow, Lord Aeneas.
Witness the process of your speech, wherein
You told how Diomed a whole week by days
Did haunt you in the field.
During all question of the gentle truce;
But when I meet you armed, as black defiance
As heart can think or courage execute.
The one and other Diomed embraces.
Our bloods are now in calm, and, so long, health;
But when contention and occasion meet,
By Jove, I'll play the hunter for thy life
With all my force, pursuit, and policy.
And thou shalt hunt a lion that will fly
With his face backward. In human gentleness,
Welcome to Troy. Now, by Anchises' life,
Welcome indeed. By Venus' hand I swear
No man alive can love in such a sort
The thing he means to kill more excellently.
We sympathize. Jove, let Aeneas live,
If to my sword his fate be not the glory,
But in mine emulous honor let him die
With every joint a wound and that tomorrow.
We do, and long to know each other worse.
This is the most despiteful gentle greeting,
The noblest hateful love, that e'er I heard of.
His purpose meets you. 'Twas to bring this Greek
To Calchas' house, and there to render him,
For the enfreed Antenor, the fair Cressid.
Let's have your company, or, if you please,
Haste there before us.  I constantly
Or, rather, call my thought a certain knowledge--
My brother Troilus lodges there tonight.
Rouse him, and give him note of our approach,
With the whole quality whereof. I fear
We shall be much unwelcome.
Troilus had rather Troy were borne to Greece
Than Cressid borne from Troy.
The bitter disposition of the time
Will have it so.--On, lord, we'll follow you.
And tell me, noble Diomed, faith, tell me true,
Even in the soul of sound good-fellowship,
Who, in your thoughts, deserves fair Helen best,
Myself or Menelaus?
He merits well to have her that doth seek her,
Not making any scruple of her soilure,
With such a hell of pain and world of charge;
And you as well to keep her that defend her,
Not palating the taste of her dishonor,
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends.
He, like a puling cuckold, would drink up
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece;
You, like a lecher, out of whorish loins
Are pleased to breed out your inheritors.
Both merits poised, each weighs nor less nor more;
But he as he, the heavier for a whore.
You are too bitter to your countrywoman.
She's bitter to her country. Hear me, Paris:
For every false drop in her bawdy veins
Of her contaminated carrion weight
She hath not given so many good words breath
As for her Greeks and Trojans suffered death.
Fair Diomed, you do as chapmen do,
Dispraise the thing that they desire to buy.
But we in silence hold this virtue well:
We'll not commend that not intend to sell.
Here lies our way.
Dear, trouble not yourself. The morn is cold.
Then, sweet my lord, I'll call mine uncle down.
He shall unbolt the gates.
To bed, to bed! Sleep kill those pretty eyes
And give as soft attachment to thy senses
As infants' empty of all thought!
Good morrow, then.
Waked by the lark, hath roused the ribald crows,
And dreaming night will hide our joys no longer,
Beshrew the witch! With venomous wights she stays
As tediously as hell, but flies the grasps of love
With wings more momentary-swift than thought.
You will catch cold and curse me.
Prithee, tarry. You men will never tarry.
And then you would have tarried. Hark, there's one up.
Here, you maid! Where's my Cousin Cressid?
Go hang yourself, you naughty mocking uncle.
You bring me to do--and then you flout me too.
Come, come, beshrew your heart! You'll ne'er be good
Nor suffer others.
Has 't not slept tonight? Would he not--a
Did not I tell you? Would he were knocked i' th' head!
Who's that at door?--Good uncle, go and see.--
My lord, come you again into my chamber.
You smile and mock me, as if I meant naughtily.
Come, you are deceived. I think of no such thing.
How earnestly they knock! Pray you, come in.
How now? What's the matter?
Come, he is here, my lord. Do not deny him.
It doth import him much to speak with me.
What should he do here?
My lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,
My matter is so rash. There is at hand
Paris your brother and Deiphobus,
The Grecian Diomed, and our Antenor
Delivered to us; and for him forthwith,
Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
We must give up to Diomedes' hand
The Lady Cressida.
By Priam and the general state of Troy.
They are at hand and ready to effect it.
We met by chance; you did not find me here.
Good, good, my lord; the secrets of nature
Have not more gift in taciturnity.
How now? What's the matter? Who was here?
Why sigh you so profoundly? Where's my lord?
Gone? Tell me, sweet uncle, what's the matter?
No kin, no love, no blood, no soul so near me
As the sweet Troilus. O you gods divine,
Make Cressid's name the very crown of falsehood
If ever she leave Troilus! Time, force, and death
Do to this body what extremes you can,
But the strong base and building of my love
Is as the very center of the Earth,
Drawing all things to it. I'll go in and weep--
Tear my bright hair, and scratch my praised cheeks,
Crack my clear voice with sobs, and break my heart
With sounding "Troilus." I will not go from Troy.
It is great morning, and the hour prefixed
For her delivery to this valiant Greek
Comes fast upon. Good my brother Troilus,
Tell you the lady what she is to do
And haste her to the purpose.
And to his hand when I deliver her,
Think it an altar and thy brother Troilus
And would, as I shall pity, I could help.--
Please you walk in, my lords?
Why tell you me of moderation?
The grief is fine, full, perfect that I taste,
And violenteth in a sense as strong
As that which causeth it. How can I moderate it?
If I could temporize with my affection
Or brew it to a weak and colder palate,
The like allayment could I give my grief.
My love admits no qualifying dross;
No more my grief in such a precious loss.
There was never a truer rhyme. Let us cast away
Cressid, I love thee in so strained a purity
That the blest gods, as angry with my fancy--
More bright in zeal than the devotion which
Cold lips blow to their deities--take thee from me.
And is it true that I must go from Troy?
And suddenly, where injury of chance
Puts back leave-taking, jostles roughly by
All time of pause, rudely beguiles our lips
Of all rejoindure, forcibly prevents
Our locked embrasures, strangles our dear vows
Even in the birth of our own laboring breath.
We two, that with so many thousand sighs
Did buy each other, must poorly sell ourselves
With the rude brevity and discharge of one.
Injurious Time now with a robber's haste
Crams his rich thiev'ry up, he knows not how.
As many farewells as be stars in heaven,
With distinct breath and consigned kisses to them,
He fumbles up into a loose adieu
And scants us with a single famished kiss,
Distasted with the salt of broken tears.
Hark, you are called. Some say the genius
Cries so to him that instantly must die.--
Bid them have patience. She shall come anon.
When shall we see again?
Hear me, my love. Be thou but true of heart--
Nay, we must use expostulation kindly,
For it is parting from us.
For I will throw my glove to Death himself
That there is no maculation in thy heart;
But "Be thou true," say I, to fashion in
My sequent protestation: "Be thou true,
And I will see thee."
As infinite as imminent! But I'll be true.
And I'll grow friend with danger. Wear this sleeve.
To give thee nightly visitation.
But yet, be true.
The Grecian youths are full of quality,
Their loving well composed, with gift of nature
And swelling o'er with arts and exercise.
How novelty may move, and parts with person,
Alas, a kind of godly jealousy--
Which I beseech you call a virtuous sin--
Makes me afeard.
In this I do not call your faith in question
So mainly as my merit. I cannot sing,
Nor heel the high lavolt, nor sweeten talk,
Nor play at subtle games--fair virtues all,
To which the Grecians are most prompt and pregnant.
But I can tell that in each grace of these
There lurks a still and dumb-discursive devil
That tempts most cunningly. But be not tempted.
But something may be done that we will not,
And sometimes we are devils to ourselves
When we will tempt the frailty of our powers,
Presuming on their changeful potency.
Nay, good my lord--
Brother Troilus!
And bring Aeneas and the Grecian with you.
Who, I? Alas, it is my vice, my fault.
Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
Whilst some with cunning gild their copper crowns,
With truth and plainness I do wear mine bare.
Fear not my truth. The moral of my wit
Is "plain and true"; there's all the reach of it.
Diomedes.]
Welcome, Sir Diomed. Here is the lady
Which for Antenor we deliver you.
At the port, lord, I'll give her to thy hand
And by the way possess thee what she is.
Entreat her fair and, by my soul, fair Greek,
If e'er thou stand at mercy of my sword,
Name Cressid, and thy life shall be as safe
As Priam is in Ilium.
So please you, save the thanks this prince expects.
The luster in your eye, heaven in your cheek,
Pleads your fair usage, and to Diomed
You shall be mistress and command him wholly.
Grecian, thou dost not use me courteously,
To shame the zeal of my petition to thee
In praising her. I tell thee, lord of Greece,
She is as far high-soaring o'er thy praises
As thou unworthy to be called her servant.
For, by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not,
Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard,
Let me be privileged by my place and message
To be a speaker free. When I am hence,
She shall be prized; but that you say "Be 't so,"
Come, to the port. I'll tell thee, Diomed,
This brave shall oft make thee to hide thy head.--
Lady, give me your hand, and, as we walk,
To our own selves bend we our needful talk.
Hark, Hector's trumpet.
The Prince must think me tardy and remiss
That swore to ride before him to the field.
Yea, with a bridegroom's fresh alacrity
Let us address to tend on Hector's heels.
The glory of our Troy doth this day lie
On his fair worth and single chivalry.
Menelaus, Ulysses, Nestor, etc. and Trumpeter.]
Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair,
Anticipating time with starting courage.
Give with thy trumpet a loud note to Troy,
Thou dreadful Ajax, that the appalled air
May pierce the head of the great combatant
And hale him hither.
Now crack thy lungs and split thy brazen pipe.
Blow, villain, till thy sphered bias cheek
Outswell the colic of puffed Aquilon.
Come, stretch thy chest, and let thy eyes spout blood.
Thou blowest for Hector.	
No trumpet answers.
Is not yond Diomed with Calchas' daughter?
He rises on the toe; that spirit of his
In aspiration lifts him from the earth.
Is this the Lady Cressid?
Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet lady.
Our general doth salute you with a kiss.
Yet is the kindness but particular.
And very courtly counsel. I'll begin.	
So much for Nestor.
Achilles bids you welcome.	
But that's no argument for kissing now,
For thus popped Paris in his hardiment
And parted thus you and your argument.
For which we lose our heads to gild his horns!
The first was Menelaus' kiss; this mine.
Patroclus kisses you.	
Paris and I kiss evermore for him.
In kissing, do you render or receive?
Both take and give.
The kiss you take is better than you give.
Therefore no kiss.
You are an odd man. Give even, or give none.
An odd man, lady? Every man is odd.
No, Paris is not, for you know 'tis true
That you are odd, and he is even with you.
You fillip me o' th' head.
It were no match, your nail against his horn.
May I, sweet lady, beg a kiss of you?
You may.
Why, then, for Venus' sake, give me a kiss
When Helen is a maid again and his.
Never's my day, and then a kiss of you.
Lady, a word. I'll bring you to your father.
There's language in her eye, her cheek, her lip;
Nay, her foot speaks. Her wanton spirits look out
At every joint and motive of her body.
That give accosting welcome ere it comes
And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts
To every tickling reader! Set them down
For sluttish spoils of opportunity
And daughters of the game.
The Trojan's trumpet.
Helenus, Troilus, and Attendants.]
Hail, all the state of Greece! What shall be done
To him that victory commands? Or do you purpose
Shall to the edge of all extremity
Pursue each other, or shall they be divided
By any voice or order of the field?
Hector bade ask.
He cares not; he'll obey conditions.
The knight opposed.
What is your name?
Therefore Achilles. But whate'er, know this:
In the extremity of great and little,
Valor and pride excel themselves in Hector,
The one almost as infinite as all,
The other blank as nothing. Weigh him well,
And that which looks like pride is courtesy.
This Ajax is half made of Hector's blood,
In love whereof half Hector stays at home;
Half heart, half hand, half Hector comes to seek
This blended knight, half Trojan and half Greek.
Here is Sir Diomed.--Go, gentle knight;
Stand by our Ajax. As you and Lord Aeneas
Consent upon the order of their fight,
So be it, either to the uttermost
Or else a breath. The combatants being kin
Half stints their strife before their strokes begin.
What Trojan is that same that looks so heavy?
The youngest son of Priam, a true knight,
Not yet mature, yet matchless firm of word,
Speaking in deeds, and deedless in his tongue,
Not soon provoked, nor being provoked soon calmed,
His heart and hand both open and both free.
For what he has, he gives; what thinks, he shows;
Yet gives he not till judgment guide his bounty,
Nor dignifies an impair thought with breath;
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous,
For Hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes
To tender objects, but he in heat of action
Is more vindicative than jealous love.
They call him Troilus, and on him erect
Thus says Aeneas, one that knows the youth
Even to his inches, and with private soul
Did in great Ilium thus translate him to me.
His blows are well disposed.--There, Ajax!
You must no more.
As Hector pleases.
Thou art, great lord, my father's sister's son,
The obligation of our blood forbids
Were thy commixtion Greek and Trojan so
That thou couldst say "This hand is Grecian all,
And this is Trojan; the sinews of this leg
All Greek, and this all Troy; my mother's blood
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister
Bounds in my father's," by Jove multipotent,
Thou shouldst not bear from me a Greekish member
Wherein my sword had not impressure made
Of our rank feud. But the just gods gainsay
That any drop thou borrowd'st from thy mother,
My sacred aunt, should by my mortal sword
Be drained. Let me embrace thee, Ajax.
By him that thunders, thou hast lusty arms!
Hector would have them fall upon him thus.
Cousin, all honor to thee!	
Thou art too gentle and too free a man.
Not Neoptolemus so mirable--
On whose bright crest Fame with her loud'st "Oyez"
Cries "This is he"--could promise to himself
There is expectance here from both the sides
What further you will do.
The issue is embracement.--Ajax, farewell.
If I might in entreaties find success,
As seld I have the chance, I would desire
My famous cousin to our Grecian tents.
Doth long to see unarmed the valiant Hector.
Aeneas, call my brother Troilus to me,
And signify this loving interview
To the expecters of our Trojan part;
Desire them home.
Great Agamemnon comes to meet us here.
The worthiest of them tell me name by name;
But for Achilles, my own searching eyes
Shall find him by his large and portly size.
Worthy all arms! As welcome as to one
That would be rid of such an enemy--
But that's no welcome. Understand more clear:
What's past and what's to come is strewed with husks
And formless ruin of oblivion;
But in this extant moment, faith and troth,
Strained purely from all hollow bias-drawing,
Bids thee, with most divine integrity,
From heart of very heart, great Hector, welcome.
My well-famed lord of Troy, no less to you.
Let me confirm my princely brother's greeting:
You brace of warlike brothers, welcome hither.
Who must we answer?
Mock not that I affect th' untraded oath;
Your quondam wife swears still by Venus' glove.
She's well, but bade me not commend her to you.
Name her not now, sir; she's a deadly theme.
Laboring for destiny, make cruel way
Through ranks of Greekish youth; and I have seen
As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian steed,
Despising many forfeits and subduments,
When thou hast hung thy advanced sword i' th' air,
Not letting it decline on the declined,
That I have said to some my standers-by
And I have seen thee pause and take thy breath
When that a ring of Greeks have hemmed thee in,
Like an Olympian wrestling. This have I seen.
But this thy countenance, still locked in steel,
And once fought with him; he was a soldier good,
But, by great Mars, the captain of us all,
Never like thee! O, let an old man embrace thee;
And, worthy warrior, welcome to our tents.
Let me embrace thee, good old chronicle
That hast so long walked hand in hand with time.
Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.
As they contend with thee in courtesy.
Ha! By this white beard, I'd fight with thee tomorrow.
Well, welcome, welcome. I have seen the time!
When we have here her base and pillar by us.
Ah, sir, there's many a Greek and Trojan dead
Since first I saw yourself and Diomed
In Ilium, on your Greekish embassy.
Sir, I foretold you then what would ensue.
My prophecy is but half his journey yet,
For yonder walls, that pertly front your town,
Yon towers, whose wanton tops do buss the clouds,
Must kiss their own feet.
There they stand yet, and modestly I think
The fall of every Phrygian stone will cost
And that old common arbitrator, Time,
Will one day end it.
Most gentle and most valiant Hector, welcome.
After the General, I beseech you next
To feast with me and see me at my tent.
Now, Hector, I have fed mine eyes on thee;
And quoted joint by joint.
Stand fair, I pray thee. Let me look on thee.
Behold thy fill.
Thou art too brief. I will the second time,
As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb.
But there's more in me than thou understand'st.
Why dost thou so oppress me with thine eye?
Tell me, you heavens, in which part of his body
Shall I destroy him--whether there, or there, or
That I may give the local wound a name
And make distinct the very breach whereout
Hector's great spirit flew. Answer me, heavens!
It would discredit the blest gods, proud man,
To answer such a question. Stand again.
Think'st thou to catch my life so pleasantly
As to prenominate in nice conjecture
Where thou wilt hit me dead?
Wert thou an oracle to tell me so,
For I'll not kill thee there, nor there, nor there,
But, by the forge that stithied Mars his helm,
You wisest Grecians, pardon me this brag;
His insolence draws folly from my lips.
But I'll endeavor deeds to match these words,
Or may I never--
And you, Achilles, let these threats alone
Till accident or purpose bring you to 't.
You may have every day enough of Hector
If you have stomach. The general state, I fear,
Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him.
We have had pelting wars since you refused
The Grecians' cause.
Tomorrow do I meet thee, fell as death;
Tonight all friends.
First, all you peers of Greece, go to my tent;
There in the full convive we. Afterwards,
As Hector's leisure and your bounties shall
Concur together, severally entreat him.
Beat loud the taborins; let the trumpets blow,
That this great soldier may his welcome know.
My Lord Ulysses, tell me, I beseech you,
In what place of the field doth Calchas keep?
At Menelaus' tent, most princely Troilus.
There Diomed doth feast with him tonight,
Who neither looks upon the heaven nor Earth,
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view
On the fair Cressid.
Shall I, sweet lord, be bound to you so much,
After we part from Agamemnon's tent,
To bring me thither?
As gentle tell me, of what honor was
This Cressida in Troy? Had she no lover there
That wails her absence?
She was beloved, she loved; she is, and doth;
But still sweet love is food for Fortune's tooth.
Which with my scimitar I'll cool tomorrow.
Patroclus, let us feast him to the height.
Here comes Thersites.
Thou crusty botch of nature, what's the news?
My sweet Patroclus, I am thwarted quite
From my great purpose in tomorrow's battle.
Here is a letter from Queen Hecuba,
Both taxing me and gaging me to keep
An oath that I have sworn. I will not break it.
Fall, Greeks; fail, fame; honor, or go or stay;
My major vow lies here; this I'll obey.
Come, come, Thersites, help to trim my tent.
This night in banqueting must all be spent.
Away, Patroclus.	
Here's Agamemnon, an honest fellow enough
Nestor, Menelaus, and Diomedes, with lights.]
Heyday! Sprites and fires!
No, yonder--'tis there, where we see the lights.
Welcome, brave Hector. Welcome, princes all.
So now, fair prince of Troy, I bid good night.
Ajax commands the guard to tend on you.
Thanks, and good night to the Greeks' general.
Good night, my lord.
Menelaus.
Sweet sink, sweet sewer.
Good night and welcome, both at once, to those
That go or tarry.
Old Nestor tarries, and you too, Diomed.
Keep Hector company an hour or two.
The tide whereof is now.--Good night, great Hector.
Follow his torch; he goes to Calchas' tent.
And so, good night.
Diomed keeps his word. I will rather leave to see
Hector than not to dog him. They say he keeps a
Trojan drab and uses the traitor Calchas his tent.
Stand where the torch may not discover us.
Cressid comes forth to him.
Now, my sweet guardian. Hark, a word with you.
Sweet honey Greek, tempt me no more to folly.
Foh, foh, come, tell a pin! You are forsworn.
In faith, I cannot. What would you have me do?
What did you swear you would bestow on me?
Bid me do anything but that, sweet Greek.
No, no, good night. I'll be your fool no more.
You are moved, prince. Let us depart, I pray you,
Lest your displeasure should enlarge itself
To wrathful terms. This place is dangerous;
The time right deadly. I beseech you, go.
Behold, I pray you.
You flow to great distraction. Come, my lord.
And so good night.	
How now, my lord?
Guardian! Why, Greek!
In faith, I do not. Come hither once again.
You shake, my lord, at something. Will you go?
You will break out.
Nay, stay. By Jove, I will not speak a word.
There is between my will and all offenses
Fry, lechery, fry!
In faith, I will, la. Never trust me else.
Give me some token for the surety of it.
You have sworn patience.
Of what I feel. I am all patience.
You look upon that sleeve? Behold it well.
He loved me--O false wench!--Give 't me again.
It is no matter, now I ha 't again.
Thy master now lies thinking on his bed
Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my glove,
And gives memorial dainty kisses to it
As I kiss thee.
He that takes that doth take my heart withal.
You shall not have it, Diomed, faith, you shall not.
But now you have it, take it.
By all Diana's waiting-women yond,
And by herself, I will not tell you whose.
Tomorrow will I wear it on my helm
And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.
Wert thou the devil and wor'st it on thy horn,
It should be challenged.
Well, well, 'tis done, 'tis past. And yet it is not.
Thou never shalt mock Diomed again.
You shall not go. One cannot speak a word
But it straight starts you.
Nor I, by Pluto! But that that likes not you
Pleases me best.
Ay, come.--O Jove!--Do, come.--I shall be plagued.
Farewell, till then.
Troilus, farewell. One eye yet looks on thee,
But with my heart the other eye doth see.
Ah, poor our sex! This fault in us I find:
The error of our eye directs our mind.
What error leads must err. O, then conclude:
Minds swayed by eyes are full of turpitude.	
Unless she said "My mind is now turned whore."
All's done, my lord.
To make a recordation to my soul
Of every syllable that here was spoke.
But if I tell how these two did co-act,
Shall I not lie in publishing a truth?
Sith yet there is a credence in my heart,
An esperance so obstinately strong.
That doth invert th' attest of eyes and ears,
As if those organs had deceptious functions,
Created only to calumniate.
Was Cressid here?
Why, my negation hath no taste of madness.
Nor mine, my lord. Cressid was here but now.
Let it not be believed for womanhood!
Think, we had mothers. Do not give advantage
To stubborn critics, apt, without a theme
For depravation, to square the general sex
By Cressid's rule. Rather, think this not Cressid.
What hath she done, prince, that can soil our
Nothing at all, unless that this were she.
This she? No, this is Diomed's Cressida.
If beauty have a soul, this is not she;
If souls guide vows, if vows be sanctimonies,
If sanctimony be the gods' delight,
If there be rule in unity itself,
This is not she. O madness of discourse,
That cause sets up with and against itself!
Bifold authority, where reason can revolt
Without perdition, and loss assume all reason
Without revolt. This is and is not Cressid.
Within my soul there doth conduce a fight
Of this strange nature, that a thing inseparate
Divides more wider than the sky and Earth,
And yet the spacious breadth of this division
Admits no orifex for a point as subtle
As Ariachne's broken woof to enter.
Instance, O instance, strong as Pluto's gates,
Cressid is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven;
Instance, O instance, strong as heaven itself,
The bonds of heaven are slipped, dissolved, and
And with another knot, five-finger-tied,
The fractions of her faith, orts of her love,
The fragments, scraps, the bits and greasy relics
Of her o'er-eaten faith are given to Diomed.
May worthy Troilus be half attached
With that which here his passion doth express?
Ay, Greek, and that shall be divulged well
In characters as red as Mars his heart
Inflamed with Venus. Never did young man fancy
With so eternal and so fixed a soul.
Hark, Greek: as much as I do Cressid love,
So much by weight hate I her Diomed.
That sleeve is mine that he'll bear on his helm.
Were it a casque composed by Vulcan's skill,
My sword should bite it. Not the dreadful spout
Which shipmen do the hurricano call,
Constringed in mass by the almighty sun,
Shall dizzy with more clamor Neptune's ear
In his descent than shall my prompted sword
Falling on Diomed.
Let all untruths stand by thy stained name,
And they'll seem glorious.
Your passion draws ears hither.
Hector, by this, is arming him in Troy.
Ajax, your guard, stays to conduct you home.
Have with you, prince.--My courteous lord, adieu.--
Farewell, revolted fair!--And, Diomed,
Stand fast, and wear a castle on thy head!
Lechery, lechery, still wars and lechery! Nothing
When was my lord so much ungently tempered
To stop his ears against admonishment?
Unarm, unarm, and do not fight today.
You train me to offend you. Get you in.
By all the everlasting gods, I'll go!
My dreams will sure prove ominous to the day.
No more, I say.
Here, sister, armed and bloody in intent.
Consort with me in loud and dear petition;
Pursue we him on knees. For I have dreamt
Of bloody turbulence, and this whole night
Hath nothing been but shapes and forms of slaughter.
No notes of sally, for the heavens, sweet brother!
Begone, I say. The gods have heard me swear.
The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows.
They are polluted off'rings more abhorred
Than spotted livers in the sacrifice.
To hurt by being just. It is as lawful,
For we would give much, to use violent thefts
And rob in the behalf of charity.
It is the purpose that makes strong the vow,
But vows to every purpose must not hold.
Unarm, sweet Hector.
Mine honor keeps the weather of my fate.
Life every man holds dear, but the dear man
Holds honor far more precious-dear than life.
How now, young man? Meanest thou to fight today?
Cassandra, call my father to persuade.
No, faith, young Troilus, doff thy harness, youth.
Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong,
And tempt not yet the brushes of the war.
Unarm thee, go, and doubt thou not, brave boy,
Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you
Which better fits a lion than a man.
What vice is that? Good Troilus, chide me for it.
When many times the captive Grecian falls,
Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword,
You bid them rise and live.
How now? How now?
Let's leave the hermit Pity with our mother,
And when we have our armors buckled on,
The venomed Vengeance ride upon our swords,
Spur them to ruthful work, rein them from ruth.
Fie, savage, fie!
Troilus, I would not have you fight today.
Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars,
Beck'ning with fiery truncheon my retire;
Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees,
Their eyes o'er-galled with recourse of tears;
Nor you, my brother, with your true sword drawn
Opposed to hinder me, should stop my way,
But by my ruin.
Lay hold upon him, Priam; hold him fast.
He is thy crutch. Now if thou loose thy stay,
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
Fall all together.
Thy wife hath dreamt, thy mother hath had visions,
Cassandra doth foresee, and I myself
Am like a prophet suddenly enrapt
To tell thee that this day is ominous.
Therefore, come back.
And I do stand engaged to many Greeks,
Even in the faith of valor, to appear
This morning to them.
You know me dutiful; therefore, dear sir,
Let me not shame respect, but give me leave
To take that course by your consent and voice
Which you do here forbid me, royal Priam.
Andromache, I am offended with you.
Upon the love you bear me, get you in.
This foolish, dreaming, superstitious girl
Makes all these bodements.
Look how thou diest! Look how thy eye turns pale!
Look how thy wounds do bleed at many vents!
Hark, how Troy roars, how Hecuba cries out,
How poor Andromache shrills her dolor forth!
Behold, distraction, frenzy, and amazement,
Like witless antics, one another meet,
And all cry "Hector! Hector's dead! O, Hector!"
Farewell.--Yet soft! Hector, I take my leave.
Thou dost thyself and all our Troy deceive.	
You are amazed, my liege, at her exclaim.
Go in and cheer the town. We'll forth and fight,
Do deeds worth praise, and tell you them at night.
Farewell. The gods with safety stand about thee!
They are at it, hark! Proud Diomed, believe,
Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart.
Th' effect doth operate another way.
Go, wind, to wind! There turn and change together.
My love with words and errors still she feeds,
But edifies another with her deeds.
Diomed, has got that same scurvy doting foolish
Trojan ass that loves the whore there might send
Ulysses--is proved not worth a blackberry. They
Soft! Here comes sleeve and t' other.
Fly not, for shouldst thou take the river Styx
Withdrew me from the odds of multitude.
Have at thee!	
What art thou, Greek? Art thou for Hector's match?
Art thou of blood and honor?
But a plague break thy neck for frighting me!
What's become of the wenching rogues? I think
Go, go, my servant, take thou Troilus' horse;
Present the fair steed to my Lady Cressid.
Fellow, commend my service to her beauty.
Tell her I have chastised the amorous Trojan
And am her knight by proof.
Renew, renew! The fierce Polydamas
Hath beat down Menon; bastard Margareton
Hath Doreus prisoner,
And stands colossus-wise, waving his beam
Upon the pashed corses of the kings
Epistrophus and Cedius. Polyxenes is slain,
Amphimachus and Thoas deadly hurt,
Patroclus ta'en or slain, and Palamedes
Sore hurt and bruised. The dreadful Sagittary
Appals our numbers. Haste we, Diomed,
To reinforcement, or we perish all.
Patroclus.]
Go, bear Patroclus' body to Achilles,
And bid the snail-paced Ajax arm for shame.
There is a thousand Hectors in the field.
Now here he fights on Galathe his horse,
And here lacks work; anon he's there afoot
And there they fly or die, like scaled schools
Before the belching whale; then is he yonder,
And there the strawy Greeks, ripe for his edge,
Fall down before him like a mower's swath.
Here, there, and everywhere he leaves and takes,
Dexterity so obeying appetite
That what he will he does, and does so much
That proof is called impossibility.
Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance.
Patroclus' wounds have roused his drowsy blood,
Together with his mangled Myrmidons,
That noseless, handless, hacked and chipped, come
Crying on Hector. Ajax hath lost a friend
And foams at mouth, and he is armed and at it,
Roaring for Troilus, who hath done today
Mad and fantastic execution,
Engaging and redeeming of himself
With such a careless force and forceless care
As if that luck, in very spite of cunning,
Bade him win all.
Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face!
Know what it is to meet Achilles angry.
Hector! Where's Hector? I will none but Hector.
Troilus, thou coward Troilus, show thy head!
Were I the General, thou shouldst have my office
Ere that correction.--Troilus, I say! What, Troilus!
And pay the life thou owest me for my horse!
He is my prize. I will not look upon.
Come, both you cogging Greeks. Have at you both!
Yea, Troilus? O, well fought, my youngest brother!
Now do I see thee. Ha! Have at thee, Hector!
Be happy that my arms are out of use.
My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
But thou anon shalt hear of me again;
Till when, go seek thy fortune.	
Had I expected thee.
How now, my brother?
Ajax hath ta'en Aeneas. Shall it be?
No, by the flame of yonder glorious heaven,
He shall not carry him. I'll be ta'en too
Or bring him off. Fate, hear me what I say!
Stand, stand, thou Greek! Thou art a goodly mark.
No? Wilt thou not? I like thy armor well.
But I'll be master of it.	
Wilt thou not, beast, abide?
Why then, fly on. I'll hunt thee for thy hide.
Come here about me, you my Myrmidons.
Mark what I say. Attend me where I wheel.
Strike not a stroke, but keep yourselves in breath,
And, when I have the bloody Hector found,
Empale him with your weapons round about.
In fellest manner execute your arms.
Follow me, sirs, and my proceedings eye.
It is decreed Hector the great must die.
Most putrefied core, so fair without,
Thy goodly armor thus hath cost thy life.
Now is my day's work done. I'll take my breath.
Rest, sword; thou hast thy fill of blood and death.
Look, Hector, how the sun begins to set,
How ugly night comes breathing at his heels.
Even with the vail and dark'ning of the sun
To close the day up, Hector's life is done.
Strike, fellows, strike! This is the man I seek.
So, Ilium, fall thou next! Come, Troy, sink down!
Here lies thy heart, thy sinews, and thy bone.
On, Myrmidons, and cry you all amain
Hark! A retire upon our Grecian part.
The Trojan trumpets sound the like, my lord.
The dragon wing of night o'erspreads the Earth
And, stickler-like, the armies separates.
My half-supped sword, that frankly would have fed,
Pleased with this dainty bait, thus goes to bed.
Come, tie his body to my horse's tail;
Along the field I will the Trojan trail.
Nestor, Diomedes, and the rest, marching to the beat of
Achilles! Achilles! Hector's slain! Achilles!
The bruit is Hector's slain, and by Achilles.
If it be so, yet bragless let it be.
Great Hector was as good a man as he.
March patiently along. Let one be sent
To pray Achilles see us at our tent.
If in his death the gods have us befriended,
Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are ended.
Stand, ho! Yet are we masters of the field.
Never go home; here starve we out the night.
Hector is slain.
He's dead, and at the murderer's horse's tail,
In beastly sort, dragged through the shameful field.
Frown on, you heavens; effect your rage with speed.
Sit, gods, upon your thrones, and smite at Troy!
And linger not our sure destructions on!
My lord, you do discomfort all the host.
You understand me not that tell me so.
But dare all imminence that gods and men
Address their dangers in. Hector is gone.
Who shall tell Priam so, or Hecuba?
Let him that will a screech-owl aye be called
Go into Troy and say their Hector's dead.
There is a word will Priam turn to stone,
Make wells and Niobes of the maids and wives,
Cold statues of the youth and, in a word,
Scare Troy out of itself. But march away.
Hector is dead. There is no more to say.
Stay yet. You vile abominable tents,
Thus proudly pitched upon our Phrygian plains,
Let Titan rise as early as he dare,
No space of earth shall sunder our two hates.
That moldeth goblins swift as frenzy's thoughts.
Strike a free march to Troy! With comfort go.
Hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe.
Hence, broker, lackey! Ignomy and shame
Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name!
Let me see:
Good traders in the flesh, set this in your painted
As many as be here of panders' hall,
Your eyes, half out, weep out at Pandar's fall;
Or if you cannot weep, yet give some groans,
Though not for me, yet for your aching bones.
Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade,
Some two months hence my will shall here be made.
It should be now, but that my fear is this:
Some galled goose of Winchester would hiss.
Till then I'll sweat and seek about for eases,
And at that time bequeath you my diseases.
Pedro of Aragon comes this night to Messina.
Pedro hath bestowed much honor on a young
Florentine called Claudio.
Benedick, Balthasar, and John the Bastard.]
Benedick, nobody marks you.
Courtesy itself must convert to disdain if you come
Claudio and Signior Benedick, my dear friend
Leonato hath invited you all. I tell him we shall stay
Signior Leonato?
Vulcan a rare carpenter? Come, in what key shall a
But I hope you have no intent to turn husband, have
Mark how short his answer is: with Hero, Leonato's
Because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust
In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.
Benedick bear it, pluck off the bull's horns and set
Venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly.
Commend me to him, and tell him I will not
Benedick.
Ere you flout old ends any further, examine your
My liege, your Highness now may do me good.
My love is thine to teach. Teach it but how,
And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn
Any hard lesson that may do thee good.
Hath Leonato any son, my lord?
No child but Hero; she's his only heir.
Dost thou affect her, Claudio?
When you went onward on this ended action,
That liked, but had a rougher task in hand
Than to drive liking to the name of love.
But now I am returned and that war thoughts
Have left their places vacant, in their rooms
Come thronging soft and delicate desires,
All prompting me how fair young Hero is,
Saying I liked her ere I went to wars.
Thou wilt be like a lover presently
And tire the hearer with a book of words.
If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it,
And I will break with her and with her father,
And thou shalt have her. Was 't not to this end
That thou began'st to twist so fine a story?
How sweetly you do minister to love,
That know love's grief by his complexion!
But lest my liking might too sudden seem,
What need the bridge much broader than the flood?
The fairest grant is the necessity.
Look what will serve is fit. 'Tis once, thou lovest,
And I will fit thee with the remedy.
And tell fair Hero I am Claudio,
And in her bosom I'll unclasp my heart
And take her hearing prisoner with the force
And strong encounter of my amorous tale.
Then after to her father will I break,
And the conclusion is, she shall be thine.
In practice let us put it presently.
Leonato.]
The Prince and Count Claudio, walking in a thick-pleached
Cousins, you know what you have to do.--O, I cry
What news, Borachio?
Prince your brother is royally entertained by
Leonato, and I can give you intelligence of an
Leonato.
Claudio, hand in hand, in sad conference. I
Claudio.
Beatrice his niece, with Ursula and Margaret.]
Count John's mouth, and half Count John's melancholy
God's sending that way, for it is said "God sends a
He that hath a beard is more than a youth, and he
No, uncle, I'll none. Adam's sons are my brethren,
Benedick, Signior Antonio, and Balthasar, all in
Benedick and Margaret move forward.]
Balthasar moves forward.]
Ursula and Antonio move forward.]
Antonio.
Benedick and Beatrice move forward.]
None but libertines delight in him, and the commendation
Don John, Borachio, and Claudio.]
Thus answer I in name of Benedick,
But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio.
Friendship is constant in all other things
Save in the office and affairs of love.
Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues.
Let every eye negotiate for itself
And trust no agent, for beauty is a witch
Against whose charms faith melteth into blood.
This is an accident of hourly proof,
Which I mistrusted not. Farewell therefore, Hero.
Or under your arm like a lieutenant's scarf? You
Hero.
It is the base, though bitter, disposition of Beatrice
Lady Fame. I found him here as melancholy as a
You shall find her the infernal Ate in good apparel. I
John's foot, fetch you a hair off the great Cham's
You have no employment for me?
Your father got excellent husbands, if a maid could
Signior Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a
And I, with your two helps, will so practice on
Benedick that, in despite of his quick wit and his
If we can do this, Cupid is no longer an archer; his
Claudio, to undo Hero, and kill Leonato. Look you
Pedro and the Count Claudio alone. Tell them that
Claudio. I have known when there was no music
One woman is fair, yet I am well; another is wise, yet
Monsieur Love! I will hide me in the arbor.
Yea, my good lord. How still the evening is,
As hushed on purpose to grace harmony!
See you where Benedick hath hid himself?
We'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.
Come, Balthasar, we'll hear that song again.
To slander music any more than once.
It is the witness still of excellency
To put a strange face on his own perfection.
Because you talk of wooing, I will sing,
Since many a wooer doth commence his suit
To her he thinks not worthy, yet he woos,
Yet will he swear he loves.
Or if thou wilt hold longer argument,
Do it in notes.
There's not a note of mine that's worth the noting.
Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks!
Note notes, forsooth, and nothing.	
Come hither, Leonato. What was it you told me of
Signior Benedick?
Hold it up.
Benedick?
She's an excellent sweet lady, and, out of all suspicion,
Let it cool the while. I love Benedick well, and I
When I said I would die a bachelor, I did not
Beatrice. By this day, she's a fair lady. I do spy some
Good Margaret, run thee to the parlor.
There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice
Proposing with the Prince and Claudio.
Whisper her ear and tell her I and Ursula
Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse
Is all of her. Say that thou overheardst us,
And bid her steal into the pleached bower
Where honeysuckles ripened by the sun
Forbid the sun to enter, like favorites,
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
Against that power that bred it. There will she hide
To listen our propose. This is thy office.
Bear thee well in it, and leave us alone.
Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come,
As we do trace this alley up and down,
Our talk must only be of Benedick.
When I do name him, let it be thy part
To praise him more than ever man did merit.
My talk to thee must be how Benedick
Is sick in love with Beatrice. Of this matter
Is little Cupid's crafty arrow made,
That only wounds by hearsay. Now begin,
For look where Beatrice like a lapwing runs
Close by the ground, to hear our conference.
The pleasant'st angling is to see the fish
Cut with her golden oars the silver stream
And greedily devour the treacherous bait.
So angle we for Beatrice, who even now
Is couched in the woodbine coverture.
Fear you not my part of the dialogue.
Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it.--
No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful.
As haggards of the rock.
That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely?
So says the Prince and my new-trothed lord.
And did they bid you tell her of it, madam?
They did entreat me to acquaint her of it,
But I persuaded them, if they loved Benedick,
To wish him wrestle with affection
And never to let Beatrice know of it.
Why did you so? Doth not the gentleman
Deserve as full as fortunate a bed
As ever Beatrice shall couch upon?
As much as may be yielded to a man,
But Nature never framed a woman's heart
Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice.
Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
Misprizing what they look on, and her wit
Values itself so highly that to her
All matter else seems weak. She cannot love,
Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
She is so self-endeared.
And therefore certainly it were not good
She knew his love, lest she'll make sport at it.
Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man,
How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured,
But she would spell him backward. If fair-faced,
She would swear the gentleman should be her
If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antic,
Made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed;
If low, an agate very vilely cut;
If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds;
If silent, why, a block moved with none.
So turns she every man the wrong side out,
And never gives to truth and virtue that
Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.
Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.
No, not to be so odd and from all fashions
As Beatrice is cannot be commendable.
But who dare tell her so? If I should speak,
She would mock me into air. O, she would laugh
Out of myself, press me to death with wit.
Therefore let Benedick, like covered fire,
Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly.
It were a better death than die with mocks,
Which is as bad as die with tickling.
Yet tell her of it. Hear what she will say.
No, rather I will go to Benedick
And counsel him to fight against his passion;
And truly I'll devise some honest slanders
To stain my cousin with. One doth not know
How much an ill word may empoison liking.
She cannot be so much without true judgment,
Having so swift and excellent a wit
As she is prized to have, as to refuse
So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.
He is the only man of Italy,
Always excepted my dear Claudio.
Speaking my fancy: Signior Benedick,
For shape, for bearing, argument, and valor,
Goes foremost in report through Italy.
Indeed, he hath an excellent good name.
His excellence did earn it ere he had it.
When are you married, madam?
Why, every day, tomorrow. Come, go in.
Which is the best to furnish me tomorrow.
She's limed, I warrant you. We have caught her,
If it prove so, then loving goes by haps;
Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.
What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true?
Contempt, farewell, and maiden pride, adieu!
And Benedick, love on; I will requite thee,
If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
For others say thou dost deserve, and I
Believe it better than reportingly.
Old signior, walk aside with me. I have studied eight
Dogberry.
Well, for your favor, sir, why, give God thanks, and
We know what belongs to a watch.
If they make you not then the better answer, you
Keep your fellows' counsels and your own, and
John a thousand ducats.
But seest thou not what a deformed thief this
Don John, saw afar off in the orchard this amiable
Watchman exits.] We have here recovered the most
Deformed forth, I warrant you.
Come, we'll obey you.
Milan's gown that they praise so.
But for a fine, quaint, graceful, and excellent fashion,
An bad thinking do not wrest true speaking,
Heigh-ho!
Lady, I am not such a fool to think what I list, nor I
Signior Benedick, Don John, and all the gallants of
Ursula.
Verges, the Headborough.]
Verges.
Worship as of any man in the city, and though I be
Worship's presence, ha' ta'en a couple of as arrant
Seacoal. Bid him bring his pen and inkhorn to the
Here's that shall drive some of them to a noncome.
Only get the learned writer to set down our excommunication
Claudio, Benedick, Hero, and Beatrice, with
Attendants.]
What men daily do, not knowing what they do!
Stand thee by, friar.--Father, by your leave,
Will you with free and unconstrained soul
Give me this maid, your daughter?
As freely, son, as God did give her me.
And what have I to give you back whose worth
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?
Nothing, unless you render her again.
Sweet prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.--
There, Leonato, take her back again.
Give not this rotten orange to your friend.
She's but the sign and semblance of her honor.
Behold how like a maid she blushes here!
Can cunning sin cover itself withal!
Comes not that blood as modest evidence
To witness simple virtue? Would you not swear,
All you that see her, that she were a maid,
By these exterior shows? But she is none.
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed.
Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.
What do you mean, my lord?
Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.
Dear my lord, if you in your own proof
Have vanquished the resistance of her youth,
And made defeat of her virginity--
You will say she did embrace me as a husband,
And so extenuate the forehand sin.
No, Leonato,
But, as a brother to his sister, showed
Bashful sincerity and comely love.
And seemed I ever otherwise to you?
Out on thee, seeming! I will write against it.
You seem to me as Dian in her orb,
As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown.
But you are more intemperate in your blood
Than Venus, or those pampered animals
That rage in savage sensuality.
Is my lord well that he doth speak so wide?
Sweet prince, why speak not you?
To link my dear friend to a common stale.
Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?
Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.
Is this the Prince? Is this the Prince's brother?
Is this face Hero's? Are our eyes our own?
All this is so, but what of this, my lord?
Let me but move one question to your daughter,
And by that fatherly and kindly power
That you have in her, bid her answer truly.
What kind of catechizing call you this?
To make you answer truly to your name.
Is it not Hero? Who can blot that name
With any just reproach?
Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue.
What man was he talked with you yesternight
Out at your window betwixt twelve and one?
Now, if you are a maid, answer to this.
Why, then, are you no maiden.--Leonato,
Myself, my brother, and this grieved count
Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window,
Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain,
Confessed the vile encounters they have had
Fie, fie, they are not to be named, my lord,
Not to be spoke of!
There is not chastity enough in language,
Without offense, to utter them.--Thus, pretty lady,
If half thy outward graces had been placed
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart!
But fare thee well, most foul, most fair. Farewell,
Thou pure impiety and impious purity.
For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love
And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang,
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
And never shall it more be gracious.
Hath no man's dagger here a point for me?
Why, how now, cousin, wherefore sink you down?
Come, let us go. These things, come thus to light,
Smother her spirits up.
How doth the lady?
Hero, why Hero! Uncle! Signior Benedick! Friar!
Death is the fairest cover for her shame
That may be wished for.
Dost thou look up?
Wherefore? Why, doth not every earthly thing
Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny
The story that is printed in her blood?--
Do not live, Hero, do not ope thine eyes,
For, did I think thou wouldst not quickly die,
Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames,
Myself would, on the rearward of reproaches,
Strike at thy life. Grieved I I had but one?
Chid I for that at frugal Nature's frame?
Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes?
Why had I not with charitable hand
Took up a beggar's issue at my gates,
Who, smirched thus, and mired with infamy,
This shame derives itself from unknown loins"?
But mine, and mine I loved, and mine I praised,
And mine that I was proud on, mine so much
That I myself was to myself not mine,
Valuing of her--why she, O she, is fall'n
Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea
Hath drops too few to wash her clean again,
And salt too little which may season give
To her foul tainted flesh!
For my part, I am so attired in wonder
Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?
No, truly not, although until last night
Confirmed, confirmed! O, that is stronger made
Which was before barred up with ribs of iron!
Would the two princes lie and Claudio lie,
Who loved her so that, speaking of her foulness,
Washed it with tears? Hence from her. Let her die!
For I have only silent been so long,
And given way unto this course of fortune,
By noting of the lady. I have marked
To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames
In angel whiteness beat away those blushes,
And in her eye there hath appeared a fire
To burn the errors that these princes hold
Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool,
Trust not my reading nor my observations,
Which with experimental seal doth warrant
The tenor of my book; trust not my age,
My reverence, calling, nor divinity,
If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here
Under some biting error.
Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left
Is that she will not add to her damnation
Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse
That which appears in proper nakedness?
Lady, what man is he you are accused of?
They know that do accuse me. I know none.
If I know more of any man alive
Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
Let all my sins lack mercy!--O my father,
Prove you that any man with me conversed
At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
Maintained the change of words with any creature,
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!
There is some strange misprision in the princes.
Two of them have the very bent of honor,
And if their wisdoms be misled in this,
The practice of it lives in John the Bastard,
Whose spirits toil in frame of villainies.
These hands shall tear her. If they wrong her honor,
The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine,
Nor age so eat up my invention,
Nor fortune made such havoc of my means,
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
But they shall find, awaked in such a kind,
Both strength of limb and policy of mind,
Ability in means and choice of friends,
To quit me of them throughly.
And let my counsel sway you in this case.
Your daughter here the princes left for dead.
Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
And publish it that she is dead indeed.
Maintain a mourning ostentation,
And on your family's old monument
Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites
That appertain unto a burial.
What shall become of this? What will this do?
Marry, this well carried shall on her behalf
Change slander to remorse. That is some good.
But not for that dream I on this strange course,
But on this travail look for greater birth.
She, dying, as it must be so maintained,
Upon the instant that she was accused,
Shall be lamented, pitied, and excused
Of every hearer. For it so falls out
That what we have we prize not to the worth
Whiles we enjoy it, but being lacked and lost,
Why then we rack the value, then we find
The virtue that possession would not show us
Whiles it was ours. So will it fare with Claudio.
When he shall hear she died upon his words,
Th' idea of her life shall sweetly creep
Into his study of imagination,
And every lovely organ of her life
Shall come appareled in more precious habit,
More moving, delicate, and full of life,
Into the eye and prospect of his soul,
Than when she lived indeed. Then shall he mourn,
If ever love had interest in his liver,
And wish he had not so accused her,
No, though he thought his accusation true.
Let this be so, and doubt not but success
Will fashion the event in better shape
Than I can lay it down in likelihood.
But if all aim but this be leveled false,
The supposition of the lady's death
Will quench the wonder of her infamy.
And if it sort not well, you may conceal her,
As best befits her wounded reputation,
In some reclusive and religious life,
Out of all eyes, tongues, minds, and injuries.
Signior Leonato, let the Friar advise you.
And though you know my inwardness and love
Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio,
Yet, by mine honor, I will deal in this
As secretly and justly as your soul
Should with your body.
The smallest twine may lead me.
Come, lady, die to live. This wedding day
But manhood is melted into curtsies, valor into
As you hear of me, so think of me. Go comfort your
Town Clerk, or Sexton, in gowns, with the Watch,
Conrade, and Borachio.]
Constable.
What is your name, friend?
Conrade.
Masters, do you serve God?
God; and write God first, for God defend but God
How answer you for yourselves?
Prince's name, accuse these men.
Prince's brother, was a villain.
Prince John is this morning secretly stolen away.
Hero was in this manner accused, in this very
Come, bind them.--Thou naughty varlet!
Messina, and one that knows the law, go to, and a
If you go on thus, you will kill yourself,
And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief
Against yourself.
Which falls into mine ears as profitless
As water in a sieve. Give not me counsel,
Nor let no comforter delight mine ear
But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine.
Bring me a father that so loved his child,
Whose joy of her is overwhelmed like mine,
And bid him speak of patience.
Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
And let it answer every strain for strain,
As thus for thus, and such a grief for such,
In every lineament, branch, shape, and form.
If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
Bid sorrow wag, cry "hem" when he should
Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk
With candle-wasters, bring him yet to me,
And I of him will gather patience.
But there is no such man. For, brother, men
Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief
Which they themselves not feel, but tasting it,
Their counsel turns to passion, which before
Would give preceptial med'cine to rage,
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ache with air and agony with words.
No, no, 'tis all men's office to speak patience
To those that wring under the load of sorrow,
But no man's virtue nor sufficiency
To be so moral when he shall endure
The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel.
My griefs cry louder than advertisement.
Therein do men from children nothing differ.
For there was never yet philosopher
That could endure the toothache patiently,
However they have writ the style of gods
And made a push at chance and sufferance.
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself.
Make those that do offend you suffer too.
There thou speak'st reason. Nay, I will do so.
My soul doth tell me Hero is belied,
And that shall Claudio know; so shall the Prince
And all of them that thus dishonor her.
Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.
Good e'en, good e'en.
Hear you, my lords--
Leonato.
Some haste, my lord! Well, fare you well, my lord.
Are you so hasty now? Well, all is one.
Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.
If he could right himself with quarrelling,
Some of us would lie low.
Marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou.
Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword.
If it should give your age such cause of fear.
In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.
Tush, tush, man, never fleer and jest at me.
As under privilege of age to brag
What I have done being young, or what would do
Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy head,
Thou hast so wronged mine innocent child and me
That I am forced to lay my reverence by,
And with gray hairs and bruise of many days
Do challenge thee to trial of a man.
Thy slander hath gone through and through her
And she lies buried with her ancestors,
Save this of hers, framed by thy villainy.
My villainy?
You say not right, old man.
Despite his nice fence and his active practice,
His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.
Away! I will not have to do with you.
Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast killed my child.
If thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.
He shall kill two of us, and men indeed,
But that's no matter. Let him kill one first.
Win me and wear me! Let him answer me.--
Come, follow me, boy. Come, sir boy, come, follow
Sir boy, I'll whip you from your foining fence,
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.
Content yourself. God knows I loved my niece,
And she is dead, slandered to death by villains
That dare as well answer a man indeed
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue.--
Boys, apes, braggarts, jacks, milksops!
Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea,
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple--
Scambling, outfacing, fashionmonging boys,
That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
Go anticly and show outward hideousness,
And speak off half a dozen dang'rous words
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst,
And this is all.
Do not you meddle. Let me deal in this.
Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience.
My heart is sorry for your daughter's death,
But, on my honor, she was charged with nothing
But what was true and very full of proof.
No? Come, brother, away. I will be heard.
And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
See, see, here comes the man we went to seek.
Had we fought, I doubt we should have been too
This last was broke 'cross.
Messina. You have among you killed a sweet and
Nay, an you be a cursing hypocrite once, you must
Borachio one!
And, briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a
Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?
But did my brother set thee on to this?
He is composed and framed of treachery,
And fled he is upon this villainy.
Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appear
In the rare semblance that I loved it first.
Which is the villain? Let me see his eyes,
That, when I note another man like him,
If you would know your wronger, look on me.
Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast killed
Mine innocent child?
No, not so, villain, thou beliest thyself.
Here stand a pair of honorable men--
Record it with your high and worthy deeds.
Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself.
Impose me to what penance your invention
Can lay upon my sin. Yet sinned I not
But in mistaking.
And yet to satisfy this good old man
That he'll enjoin me to.
That were impossible--but, I pray you both,
Possess the people in Messina here
How innocent she died. And if your love
Can labor aught in sad invention,
Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb
And sing it to her bones. Sing it tonight.
Tomorrow morning come you to my house,
And since you could not be my son-in-law,
Be yet my nephew. My brother hath a daughter,
Almost the copy of my child that's dead,
And she alone is heir to both of us.
Give her the right you should have giv'n her cousin,
And so dies my revenge.
Your overkindness doth wring tears from me.
For henceforth of poor Claudio.
Tomorrow then I will expect your coming.
Tonight I take my leave. This naughty man
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret,
Who I believe was packed in all this wrong,
Hired to it by your brother.
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me,
But always hath been just and virtuous
In anything that I do know by her.
Pray you, examine him upon that point.
Worship! I wish your Worship well. God restore you
Come, neighbor.	
Until tomorrow morning, lords, farewell.
Farewell, my lords. We look for you tomorrow.
We will not fail.
Bring you these fellows on.--We'll talk with
Margaret,
How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
Beatrice.
Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I called
Claudio.
Hang thou there upon the tomb,
Praising her when I am dumb.
Now music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn.
Song
Now, unto thy bones, goodnight.
Yearly will I do this rite.
Good morrow, masters. Put your torches out.
Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about
Thanks to you all, and leave us. Fare you well.
Good morrow, masters. Each his several way.
Come, let us hence, and put on other weeds,
And Hymen now with luckier issue speed 's,
Leonato's brother, Friar, Hero.]
Did I not tell you she was innocent?
So are the Prince and Claudio, who accused her
Upon the error that you heard debated.
But Margaret was in some fault for this,
Although against her will, as it appears
In the true course of all the question.
Well, I am glad that all things sorts so well.
And so am I, being else by faith enforced
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.
Well, daughter, and you gentlewomen all,
Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves,
And when I send for you, come hither masked.
The Prince and Claudio promised by this hour
To visit me.--You know your office, brother.
You must be father to your brother's daughter,
And give her to young Claudio.	
Which I will do with confirmed countenance.
Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.
To bind me, or undo me, one of them.--
Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favor.
That eye my daughter lent her; 'tis most true.
And I do with an eye of love requite her.
The sight whereof I think you had from me,
From Claudio, and the Prince. But what's your will?
Your answer, sir, is enigmatical.
But for my will, my will is your goodwill
May stand with ours, this day to be conjoined
In the state of honorable marriage--
In which, good friar, I shall desire your help.
My heart is with your liking.
Here comes the Prince and Claudio.
Good morrow, prince; good morrow, Claudio.
We here attend you. Are you yet determined
Today to marry with my brother's daughter?
Call her forth, brother. Here's the Friar ready.
Good morrow, Benedick. Why, what's the matter
That you have such a February face,
So full of frost, of storm, and cloudiness?
Tush, fear not, man. We'll tip thy horns with gold,
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
As once Europa did at lusty Jove
When he would play the noble beast in love.
Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low,
And some such strange bull leapt your father's cow
And got a calf in that same noble feat
Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.
For this I owe you. Here comes other reck'nings.
Ursula, the ladies masked.]
Which is the lady I must seize upon?
This same is she, and I do give you her.
Why, then, she's mine.--Sweet, let me see your face.
No, that you shall not till you take her hand
Before this friar and swear to marry her.
Give me your hand before this holy friar.
And when I lived, I was your other wife,
And when you loved, you were my other husband.
Another Hero!
One Hero died defiled, but I do live,
And surely as I live, I am a maid.
The former Hero! Hero that is dead!
She died, my lord, but whiles her slander lived.
All this amazement can I qualify,
When after that the holy rites are ended,
Meantime let wonder seem familiar,
And to the chapel let us presently.
Soft and fair, friar.--Which is Beatrice?
Do not you love me?
Why then, your uncle and the Prince and Claudio
Have been deceived. They swore you did.
Do not you love me?
Why then, my cousin, Margaret, and Ursula
Are much deceived, for they did swear you did.
They swore that you were almost sick for me.
They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.
No, truly, but in friendly recompense.
Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.
And I'll be sworn upon 't that he loves her,
For here's a paper written in his hand,
Fashioned to Beatrice.	
Writ in my cousin's hand, stol'n from her pocket,
Containing her affection unto Benedick.
How dost thou, Benedick, the married man?
Dost thou think I care for a satire or an epigram?
No. If a man will be beaten with brains, he shall
Beatrice, that I might have cudgeled thee out of thy
Prince, thou art sad. Get thee a wife, get thee a wife.
There is no staff more reverend than one tipped
My lord, your brother John is ta'en in flight,
And brought with armed men back to Messina.
Enter King Henry, Duke Humphrey of Gloucester,
Salisbury, Warwick, and Cardinal Beaufort, on the one
Buckingham, on the other.]
As by your high imperial Majesty
As procurator to your Excellence,
To marry Princess Margaret for your Grace,
So, in the famous ancient city Tours,
In presence of the Kings of France and Sicil,
The Dukes of Orleance, Calaber, Britaigne, and
Alanson,
Seven earls, twelve barons, and twenty reverend
And humbly now upon my bended knee,
In sight of England and her lordly peers,
Deliver up my title in the Queen
To your most gracious hands, that are the substance
Of that great shadow I did represent:
The happiest gift that ever marquess gave,
The fairest queen that ever king received.
Suffolk, arise.--Welcome, Queen Margaret.
Than this kind kiss.	
Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness!
For Thou hast given me in this beauteous face
If sympathy of love unite our thoughts.
Great king of England and my gracious lord,
The mutual conference that my mind hath had
By day, by night, waking and in my dreams,
In courtly company or at my beads,
With you, mine alderliefest sovereign,
Makes me the bolder to salute my king
With ruder terms, such as my wit affords
And overjoy of heart doth minister.
Her sight did ravish, but her grace in speech,
Her words yclad with wisdom's majesty,
Makes me from wond'ring fall to weeping joys,
Such is the fullness of my heart's content.
Lords, with one cheerful voice welcome my love.
Long live Queen Margaret, England's happiness!
My Lord Protector, so it please your Grace,
Here are the articles of contracted peace
Between our sovereign and the French king Charles,
For eighteen months concluded by consent.
French king Charles and William de la Pole, Marquess
Margaret, daughter unto Reignier, King of Naples,
Sicilia, and Jerusalem, and crown her Queen of England
Uncle, how now?
Some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heart
And dimmed mine eyes, that I can read no further.
Uncle of Winchester, I pray read on.
Anjou and Maine shall be released and delivered to
England's own proper cost and charges, without
They please us well.--Lord Marquess, kneel down.
We here create thee the first Duke of Suffolk
And girt thee with the sword.  Cousin
We here discharge your Grace from being regent
Be full expired.--Thanks, Uncle Winchester,
Gloucester, York, Buckingham, Somerset,
Salisbury, and Warwick;
We thank you all for this great favor done
In entertainment to my princely queen.
Come, let us in, and with all speed provide
To see her coronation be performed.
The rest remain.]
Brave peers of England, pillars of the state,
To you Duke Humphrey must unload his grief,
Your grief, the common grief of all the land.
What, did my brother Henry spend his youth,
His valor, coin, and people in the wars?
Did he so often lodge in open field,
In winter's cold and summer's parching heat,
To conquer France, his true inheritance?
And did my brother Bedford toil his wits
To keep by policy what Henry got?
Have you yourselves, Somerset, Buckingham,
Brave York, Salisbury, and victorious Warwick,
Received deep scars in France and Normandy?
Or hath mine uncle Beaufort and myself,
With all the learned council of the realm,
Studied so long, sat in the Council House,
Early and late, debating to and fro
How France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe,
And had his Highness in his infancy
Crowned in Paris in despite of foes?
And shall these labors and these honors die?
Shall Henry's conquest, Bedford's vigilance,
Your deeds of war, and all our counsel die?
Fatal this marriage, cancelling your fame,
Blotting your names from books of memory,
Razing the characters of your renown,
Defacing monuments of conquered France,
Undoing all, as all had never been!
Nephew, what means this passionate discourse,
This peroration with such circumstance?
For France, 'tis ours, and we will keep it still.
Ay, uncle, we will keep it if we can,
But now it is impossible we should.
Suffolk, the new-made duke that rules the roast,
Hath given the duchy of Anjou and Maine
Unto the poor King Reignier, whose large style
Agrees not with the leanness of his purse.
Now, by the death of Him that died for all,
These counties were the keys of Normandy.
But wherefore weeps Warwick, my valiant son?
For grief that they are past recovery;
For, were there hope to conquer them again,
My sword should shed hot blood, mine eyes no
Anjou and Maine? Myself did win them both!
Those provinces these arms of mine did conquer.
And are the cities that I got with wounds
Delivered up again with peaceful words?
Mort Dieu!
For Suffolk's duke, may he be suffocate
That dims the honor of this warlike isle!
France should have torn and rent my very heart
Before I would have yielded to this league.
Large sums of gold and dowries with their wives;
And our King Henry gives away his own
To match with her that brings no vantages.
That Suffolk should demand a whole fifteenth
For costs and charges in transporting her!
She should have stayed in France and starved in
France
Before--
My lord of Gloucester, now you grow too hot.
It was the pleasure of my lord the King.
My lord of Winchester, I know your mind.
But 'tis my presence that doth trouble you.
Rancor will out. Proud prelate, in thy face
We shall begin our ancient bickerings.--
Lordings, farewell; and say, when I am gone,
So, there goes our Protector in a rage.
Nay, more, an enemy unto you all,
And no great friend, I fear me, to the King.
Consider, lords, he is the next of blood
And heir apparent to the English crown.
Had Henry got an empire by his marriage,
And all the wealthy kingdoms of the West,
There's reason he should be displeased at it.
Look to it, lords. Let not his smoothing words
Bewitch your hearts; be wise and circumspect.
What though the common people favor him,
Calling him "Humphrey, the good Duke of
Gloucester,"
Clapping their hands and crying with loud voice
With "God preserve the good Duke Humphrey!"
He will be found a dangerous Protector.
Why should he, then, protect our sovereign,
He being of age to govern of himself?--
Cousin of Somerset, join you with me,
And all together, with the Duke of Suffolk,
We'll quickly hoise Duke Humphrey from his seat.
This weighty business will not brook delay.
Cousin of Buckingham, though Humphrey's pride
And greatness of his place be grief to us,
Yet let us watch the haughty cardinal.
His insolence is more intolerable
Than all the princes' in the land besides.
If Gloucester be displaced, he'll be Protector.
Or thou or I, Somerset, will be Protector,
Despite Duke Humphrey or the Cardinal.
Pride went before; Ambition follows him.
While these do labor for their own preferment,
Behooves it us to labor for the realm.
Did bear him like a noble gentleman.
Oft have I seen the haughty cardinal,
More like a soldier than a man o' th' Church,
As stout and proud as he were lord of all,
Swear like a ruffian and demean himself
Unlike the ruler of a commonweal.--
Warwick, my son, the comfort of my age,
Thy deeds, thy plainness, and thy housekeeping
Hath won the greatest favor of the Commons,
Excepting none but good Duke Humphrey.--
And, brother York, thy acts in Ireland,
In bringing them to civil discipline,
Thy late exploits done in the heart of France,
When thou wert regent for our sovereign,
Have made thee feared and honored of the people.
Join we together for the public good
In what we can to bridle and suppress
The pride of Suffolk and the Cardinal,
With Somerset's and Buckingham's ambition;
And, as we may, cherish Duke Humphrey's deeds
While they do tend the profit of the land.
So God help Warwick, as he loves the land
And common profit of his country!
And so says York-- for he hath greatest
Then let's make haste away and look unto the main.
Unto the main? O father, Maine is lost!
That Maine which by main force Warwick did win
And would have kept so long as breath did last!
Main chance, father, you meant; but I meant Maine,
Which I will win from France or else be slain.
York remains.]
Anjou and Maine are given to the French;
Paris is lost; the state of Normandy
Stands on a tickle point now they are gone.
Suffolk concluded on the articles,
The peers agreed, and Henry was well pleased
To change two dukedoms for a duke's fair daughter.
Pirates may make cheap pennyworths of their
And purchase friends, and give to courtesans,
Still reveling like lords till all be gone;
Whileas the silly owner of the goods
Weeps over them, and wrings his hapless hands,
And shakes his head, and trembling stands aloof,
While all is shared and all is borne away,
Ready to starve, and dare not touch his own.
So York must sit and fret and bite his tongue
While his own lands are bargained for and sold.
Methinks the realms of England, France, and
Ireland
Bear that proportion to my flesh and blood
As did the fatal brand Althaea burnt
Unto the Prince's heart of Calydon.
Anjou and Maine both given unto the French!
Cold news for me, for I had hope of France,
Even as I have of fertile England's soil.
And therefore I will take the Nevilles' parts
And make a show of love to proud Duke Humphrey,
And, when I spy advantage, claim the crown,
For that's the golden mark I seek to hit.
Nor shall proud Lancaster usurp my right,
Nor hold the scepter in his childish fist,
Nor wear the diadem upon his head,
Whose churchlike humors fits not for a crown.
Then, York, be still awhile till time do serve.
Watch thou and wake, when others be asleep,
To pry into the secrets of the state
Till Henry, surfeiting in joys of love
With his new bride and England's dear-bought
And Humphrey with the peers be fall'n at jars.
Then will I raise aloft the milk-white rose,
With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfumed,
And in my standard bear the arms of York,
To grapple with the house of Lancaster;
And force perforce I'll make him yield the crown,
Whose bookish rule hath pulled fair England down.
Why droops my lord like over-ripened corn
Hanging the head at Ceres' plenteous load?
Why doth the great Duke Humphrey knit his brows,
As frowning at the favors of the world?
Why are thine eyes fixed to the sullen earth,
Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight?
What seest thou there? King Henry's diadem,
Enchased with all the honors of the world?
If so, gaze on and grovel on thy face
Until thy head be circled with the same.
Put forth thy hand; reach at the glorious gold.
What, is 't too short? I'll lengthen it with mine;
And, having both together heaved it up,
We'll both together lift our heads to heaven
And never more abase our sight so low
As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.
Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts!
And may that hour when I imagine ill
Against my king and nephew, virtuous Henry,
Be my last breathing in this mortal world!
My troublous dreams this night doth make me sad.
What dreamed my lord? Tell me, and I'll requite it
With sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream.
Methought this staff, mine office badge in court,
Was broke in twain--by whom I have forgot,
But, as I think, it was by th' Cardinal--
And on the pieces of the broken wand
Were placed the heads of Edmund, Duke of
Somerset,
And William de la Pole, first Duke of Suffolk.
This was my dream. What it doth bode God knows.
Tut, this was nothing but an argument
That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's grove
Shall lose his head for his presumption.
But list to me, my Humphrey, my sweet duke:
Methought I sat in seat of majesty,
In the cathedral church of Westminster
And in that chair where kings and queens were
Where Henry and Dame Margaret kneeled to me
And on my head did set the diadem.
Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright.
Presumptuous dame, ill-nurtured Eleanor,
Art thou not second woman in the realm
And the Protector's wife, beloved of him?
Hast thou not worldly pleasure at command,
Above the reach or compass of thy thought?
And wilt thou still be hammering treachery
To tumble down thy husband and thyself
From top of honor to disgrace's feet?
Away from me, and let me hear no more!
What, what, my lord? Are you so choleric
With Eleanor for telling but her dream?
Next time I'll keep my dreams unto myself
And not be checked.
Nay, be not angry. I am pleased again.
My Lord Protector, 'tis his Highness' pleasure
You do prepare to ride unto Saint Albans,
Whereas the King and Queen do mean to hawk.
Yes, my good lord. I'll follow presently.
Follow I must; I cannot go before
While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind.
Were I a man, a duke, and next of blood,
And smooth my way upon their headless necks;
And, being a woman, I will not be slack
To play my part in Fortune's pageant.--
Where are you there? Sir John! Nay, fear not, man.
We are alone; here's none but thee and I.
Jesus preserve your royal Majesty!
What sayst thou? "Majesty"? I am but "Grace."
But by the grace of God and Hume's advice,
Your Grace's title shall be multiplied.
What sayst thou, man? Hast thou as yet conferred
With Margery Jourdain, the cunning witch,
With Roger Bolingbroke, the conjurer?
And will they undertake to do me good?
This they have promised: to show your Highness
That shall make answer to such questions
As by your Grace shall be propounded him.
It is enough. I'll think upon the questions.
When from Saint Albans we do make return,
We'll see these things effected to the full.
Here, Hume, take this reward.
Make merry, man,
With thy confederates in this weighty cause.
Hume must make merry with the Duchess' gold.
Marry, and shall! But, how now, Sir John Hume?
Seal up your lips, and give no words but "mum";
The business asketh silent secrecy.
Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch;
Gold cannot come amiss, were she a devil.
Yet have I gold flies from another coast--
And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk,
Yet I do find it so. For, to be plain,
They, knowing Dame Eleanor's aspiring humor,
Have hired me to undermine the Duchess
And buzz these conjurations in her brain.
They say a crafty knave does need no broker,
Yet am I Suffolk and the Cardinal's broker.
Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go near
To call them both a pair of crafty knaves.
Well, so it stands; and thus I fear at last
Hume's knavery will be the Duchess' wrack,
And her attainture will be Humphrey's fall.
Sort how it will, I shall have gold for all.
Armorer's man, being one.]
Lord Protector will come this way by and by, and
Queen with him. I'll be the first, sure.
Lord Protector. Are your supplications to his Lordship?
Let me see them.--What is thine?
What's yours?  What's here?
Thomas Horner, for saying that the Duke of York
York say he was rightful heir to the crown?
Take this fellow in, and send for his master with a
And as for you that love to be protected
Under the wings of our Protector's grace,
Begin your suits anew, and sue to him.
Away, base cullions.--Suffolk, let them go.
My lord of Suffolk, say, is this the guise,
Is this the fashions in the court of England?
Is this the government of Britain's isle
And this the royalty of Albion's king?
What, shall King Henry be a pupil still
Under the surly Gloucester's governance?
Am I a queen in title and in style,
And must be made a subject to a duke?
Thou rann'st atilt in honor of my love
And stol'st away the ladies' hearts of France,
In courage, courtship, and proportion.
But all his mind is bent to holiness,
To number Ave Marys on his beads;
His champions are the prophets and apostles,
His weapons holy saws of sacred writ,
His study is his tiltyard, and his loves
Are brazen images of canonized saints.
Would choose him pope and carry him to Rome
And set the triple crown upon his head!
That were a state fit for his holiness.
Madam, be patient. As I was cause
Your Highness came to England, so will I
In England work your Grace's full content.
Besides the haughty Protector, have we Beaufort
The imperious churchman, Somerset, Buckingham,
And grumbling York; and not the least of these
But can do more in England than the King.
And he of these that can do most of all
Cannot do more in England than the Nevilles;
Salisbury and Warwick are no simple peers.
Not all these lords do vex me half so much
As that proud dame, the Lord Protector's wife.
She sweeps it through the court with troops of
More like an empress than Duke Humphrey's wife.
Strangers in court do take her for the Queen.
She bears a duke's revenues on her back,
And in her heart she scorns our poverty.
Shall I not live to be avenged on her?
Contemptuous baseborn callet as she is,
She vaunted 'mongst her minions t' other day
The very train of her worst wearing gown
Was better worth than all my father's lands
Till Suffolk gave two dukedoms for his daughter.
Madam, myself have limed a bush for her
And placed a choir of such enticing birds
That she will light to listen to the lays
And never mount to trouble you again.
So let her rest. And, madam, list to me,
For I am bold to counsel you in this:
Although we fancy not the Cardinal,
Yet must we join with him and with the lords
Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace.
As for the Duke of York, this late complaint
Will make but little for his benefit.
So, one by one, we'll weed them all at last,
And you yourself shall steer the happy helm.
Gloucester.]
For my part, noble lords, I care not which;
Or Somerset or York, all's one to me.
If York have ill demeaned himself in France,
Then let him be denied the regentship.
If Somerset be unworthy of the place,
Let York be regent; I will yield to him.
Whether your Grace be worthy, yea or no,
Dispute not that. York is the worthier.
Ambitious Warwick, let thy betters speak.
The Cardinal's not my better in the field.
All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick.
Warwick may live to be the best of all.
Peace, son.--And show some reason, Buckingham,
Why Somerset should be preferred in this.
Because the King, forsooth, will have it so.
Madam, the King is old enough himself
To give his censure. These are no women's matters.
If he be old enough, what needs your Grace
To be Protector of his Excellence?
Madam, I am Protector of the realm,
And at his pleasure will resign my place.
Resign it, then, and leave thine insolence.
Since thou wert king--as who is king but thou?--
The commonwealth hath daily run to wrack,
The Dauphin hath prevailed beyond the seas,
And all the peers and nobles of the realm
Have been as bondmen to thy sovereignty.
The Commons hast thou racked; the clergy's bags
Are lank and lean with thy extortions.
Thy sumptuous buildings and thy wife's attire
Have cost a mass of public treasury.
Thy cruelty in execution
Upon offenders hath exceeded law
And left thee to the mercy of the law.
Thy sale of offices and towns in France,
If they were known, as the suspect is great,
Would make thee quickly hop without thy head.
Was 't I? Yea, I it was, proud Frenchwoman.
Could I come near your beauty with my nails,
Sweet aunt, be quiet. 'Twas against her will.
Against her will, good king? Look to 't in time.
She'll hamper thee and dandle thee like a baby.
Though in this place most master wear no breeches,
She shall not strike Dame Eleanor unrevenged.
Lord Cardinal, I will follow Eleanor
And listen after Humphrey how he proceeds.
She's tickled now; her fume needs no spurs;
She'll gallop far enough to her destruction.
Now, lords, my choler being overblown
With walking once about the quadrangle,
As for your spiteful false objections,
Prove them, and I lie open to the law;
But God in mercy so deal with my soul
As I in duty love my king and country!
But, to the matter that we have in hand:
To be your regent in the realm of France.
Before we make election, give me leave
To show some reason, of no little force,
That York is most unmeet of any man.
First, for I cannot flatter thee in pride;
Next, if I be appointed for the place,
My lord of Somerset will keep me here
Without discharge, money, or furniture
Till France be won into the Dauphin's hands.
Last time I danced attendance on his will
Till Paris was besieged, famished, and lost.
That can I witness, and a fouler fact
Did never traitor in the land commit.
Image of pride, why should I hold my peace?
Peter, under guard.]
Because here is a man accused of treason.
Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself!
Doth anyone accuse York for a traitor?
What mean'st thou, Suffolk? Tell me, what are
Please it your Majesty, this is the man
That doth accuse his master of high treason.
His words were these: that Richard, Duke of York,
Was rightful heir unto the English crown,
And that your Majesty was an usurper.
Base dunghill villain and mechanical,
Let him have all the rigor of the law.
Majesty, do not cast away an honest man for a
Uncle, what shall we say to this in law?
This doom, my lord, if I may judge:
Let Somerset be regent o'er the French,
Because in York this breeds suspicion;
And let these have a day appointed them
For single combat in convenient place,
For he hath witness of his servant's malice.
This is the law, and this Duke Humphrey's doom.
And I accept the combat willingly.
Lord, have mercy upon me! I shall never be able to
Sirrah, or you must fight or else be hanged.
Come, Somerset, we'll see thee sent away.
Hume and Southwell, and Bolingbroke, a conjurer.]
Will her Ladyship behold and hear our
Master Hume, that you be by her aloft
God's name, and leave us.	
Mother Jourdain, be you prostrate and grovel on
Patience, good lady. Wizards know their times.
Deep night, dark night, the silent of the night,
The time of night when Troy was set on fire,
The time when screech owls cry and bandogs howl,
And spirits walk, and ghosts break up their graves--
That time best fits the work we have in hand.
Madam, sit you, and fear not. Whom we raise
We will make fast within a hallowed verge.
By the eternal God, whose name and power
Thou tremblest at, answer that I shall ask,
For till thou speak, thou shalt not pass from hence.
Ask what thou wilt. That I had said and done!
First of the King: What shall of him become?
The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose,
But him outlive and die a violent death.
What fates await the Duke of Suffolk?
By water shall he die and take his end.
What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?
Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
Than where castles mounted stand.
Have done, for more I hardly can endure.
Descend to darkness and the burning lake!
False fiend, avoid!
Lay hands upon these traitors and their trash.
Are deeply indebted for this piece of pains.
My Lord Protector will, I doubt it not,
See you well guerdoned for these good deserts.
Not half so bad as thine to England's king,
Injurious duke, that threatest where's no cause.
True, madam, none at all. What call you this?
Away with them! Let them be clapped up close
And kept asunder.--You, madam, shall with us.--
Stafford, take her to thee.	
We'll see your trinkets here all forthcoming.
All away!	
Lord Buckingham, methinks you watched her well.
Now, pray, my lord, let's see the devil's writ.
What have we here?
But him outlive and die a violent death.
Why, this is just Aio te, Aeacida,
Romanos vincere posse. Well, to the rest:
Suffolk?
By water shall he die and take his end.
What shall betide the Duke of Somerset?
Let him shun castles;
Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
Than where castles mounted stand.
Come, come, my lord, these oracles
Are hardly attained and hardly understood.
The King is now in progress towards Saint Albans;
With him the husband of this lovely lady.
Thither goes these news as fast as horse can carry
Your Grace shall give me leave, my lord of York,
To be the post, in hope of his reward.
Who's within there, ho!
Invite my lords of Salisbury and Warwick
To sup with me tomorrow night. Away!
Lord Protector, Cardinal, and Suffolk, and
Attendants, with Falconers hallowing.]
Believe me, lords, for flying at the brook
Yet, by your leave, the wind was very high,
And, ten to one, old Joan had not gone out.
But what a point, my lord, your falcon made,
And what a pitch she flew above the rest!
To see how God in all his creatures works!
Yea, man and birds are fain of climbing high.
No marvel, an it like your Majesty,
My Lord Protector's hawks do tower so well;
They know their master loves to be aloft
And bears his thoughts above his falcon's pitch.
My lord, 'tis but a base ignoble mind
That mounts no higher than a bird can soar.
Ay, my Lord Cardinal, how think you by that?
Were it not good your Grace could fly to heaven?
The treasury of everlasting joy.
Thy heaven is on Earth; thine eyes and thoughts
Beat on a crown, the treasure of thy heart.
Pernicious Protector, dangerous peer,
That smooth'st it so with king and commonweal!
What, cardinal, is your priesthood grown
Tantaene animis caelestibus irae?
Churchmen so hot? Good uncle, hide such malice.
With such holiness, can you do it?
No malice, sir, no more than well becomes
So good a quarrel and so bad a peer.
As who, my lord?
An 't like your lordly Lord Protectorship.
Why, Suffolk, England knows thine insolence.
And thy ambition, Gloucester.
Good queen, and whet not on these furious peers,
For blessed are the peacemakers on Earth.
Let me be blessed for the peace I make
Against this proud Protector with my sword!
Faith, holy uncle, would 't were come to that!
Make up no factious numbers for the matter.
In thine own person answer thy abuse.
Ay, where thou dar'st not peep. An if thou dar'st,
This evening, on the east side of the grove.
How now, my lords?
Had not your man put up the fowl so suddenly,
We had had more sport. 
Come with thy two-hand sword.
True, uncle.  Are you advised?
The east side of the grove.
Talking of hawking; nothing else, my lord.
Or all my fence shall fail.
Protector, see to 't well; protect yourself.
The winds grow high; so do your stomachs, lords.
How irksome is this music to my heart!
When such strings jar, what hope of harmony?
Fellow, what miracle dost thou proclaim?
Come to the King, and tell him what miracle.
Forsooth, a blind man at Saint Alban's shrine
Within this half hour hath received his sight,
Now, God be praised, that to believing souls
Gives light in darkness, comfort in despair.
Here comes the townsmen on procession
To present your Highness with the man.
Great is his comfort in this earthly vale,
Although by his sight his sin be multiplied.
Stand by, my masters.--Bring him near the King.
His Highness' pleasure is to talk with him.
Good fellow, tell us here the circumstance,
That we for thee may glorify the Lord.
What, hast thou been long blind and now restored?
At Berwick in the North, an 't like your Grace.
Poor soul, God's goodness hath been great to thee.
Let never day nor night unhallowed pass,
But still remember what the Lord hath done.
Tell me, good fellow, cam'st thou here by chance,
Or of devotion to this holy shrine?
God knows, of pure devotion, being called
By good Saint Alban, who said "Simon, come,
Come, offer at my shrine, and I will help thee."
Most true, forsooth, and many time and oft
Myself have heard a voice to call him so.
Let me see thine eyes. Wink now. Now open them.
In my opinion, yet thou seest not well.
Saint Alban.
Sayst thou me so? What color is this cloak of?
Why, that's well said. What color is my gown of?
Why, then, thou know'st what color jet is of.
And yet, I think, jet did he never see.
But cloaks and gowns, before this day, a many.
Never, before this day, in all his life.
Alban here hath done a miracle; and would you
You go about to torture me in vain.
It made me laugh to see the villain run.
Follow the knave, and take this drab away.
Let them be whipped through every market town
Till they come to Berwick, from whence they came.
Saint Albans exit.]
Duke Humphrey has done a miracle today.
True, made the lame to leap and fly away.
But you have done more miracles than I.
You made in a day, my lord, whole towns to fly.
What tidings with our cousin Buckingham?
Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold:
Under the countenance and confederacy
Of Lady Eleanor, the Protector's wife,
The ringleader and head of all this rout,
Have practiced dangerously against your state,
Dealing with witches and with conjurers,
Whom we have apprehended in the fact,
Raising up wicked spirits from under ground,
Demanding of King Henry's life and death
And other of your Highness' Privy Council,
As more at large your Grace shall understand.
And so, my Lord Protector, by this means
Your lady is forthcoming yet at London.
Ambitious churchman, leave to afflict my heart.
Sorrow and grief have vanquished all my powers,
And, vanquished as I am, I yield to thee,
Or to the meanest groom.
Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby!
Gloucester, see here the tainture of thy nest,
And look thyself be faultless, thou wert best.
Madam, for myself, to heaven I do appeal
How I have loved my king and commonweal;
And, for my wife, I know not how it stands.
Sorry I am to hear what I have heard.
Noble she is; but if she have forgot
Honor and virtue, and conversed with such
As, like to pitch, defile nobility,
And give her as a prey to law and shame
That hath dishonored Gloucester's honest name.
Well, for this night we will repose us here.
Tomorrow toward London back again,
To look into this business thoroughly,
And call these foul offenders to their answers,
And poise the cause in Justice' equal scales,
Whose beam stands sure, whose rightful cause
Now, my good lords of Salisbury and Warwick,
Our simple supper ended, give me leave,
In this close walk, to satisfy myself
In craving your opinion of my title,
Which is infallible, to England's crown.
My lord, I long to hear it at full.
Sweet York, begin; and if thy claim be good,
The Nevilles are thy subjects to command.
Edward the Third, my lords, had seven sons:
The first, Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Wales;
The second, William of Hatfield; and the third,
Lionel, Duke of Clarence; next to whom
Was John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster;
The fifth was Edmund Langley, Duke of York;
The sixth was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of
Gloucester;
William of Windsor was the seventh and last.
Edward the Black Prince died before his father
And left behind him Richard, his only son,
Who, after Edward the Third's death, reigned as
Till Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Lancaster,
The eldest son and heir of John of Gaunt,
Crowned by the name of Henry the Fourth,
Seized on the realm, deposed the rightful king,
Sent his poor queen to France, from whence she
And him to Pomfret; where, as all you know,
Harmless Richard was murdered traitorously.
Thus got the house of Lancaster the crown.
Which now they hold by force and not by right;
For Richard, the first son's heir, being dead,
The issue of the next son should have reigned.
But William of Hatfield died without an heir.
The third son, Duke of Clarence, from whose line
Who married Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March.
Edmund had issue, Roger, Earl of March;
Roger had issue: Edmund, Anne, and Eleanor.
This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke,
As I have read, laid claim unto the crown
And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king,
Who kept him in captivity till he died.
But to the rest.
My mother, being heir unto the crown,
Married Richard, Earl of Cambridge, who was son
To Edmund Langley, Edward the Third's fifth son.
By her I claim the kingdom. She was heir
To Roger, Earl of March, who was the son
Of Edmund Mortimer, who married Philippa,
Sole daughter unto Lionel, Duke of Clarence.
So, if the issue of the elder son
Succeed before the younger, I am king.
What plain proceedings is more plain than this?
Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt,
The fourth son; York claims it from the third.
Till Lionel's issue fails, his should not reign.
It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee
And in thy sons, fair slips of such a stock.
Then, father Salisbury, kneel we together,
And in this private plot be we the first
That shall salute our rightful sovereign
With honor of his birthright to the crown.
Long live our sovereign Richard, England's king!
We thank you, lords.  But I am not your
Till I be crowned, and that my sword be stained
With heart-blood of the house of Lancaster;
And that's not suddenly to be performed,
But with advice and silent secrecy.
Do you as I do in these dangerous days:
Wink at the Duke of Suffolk's insolence,
At Beaufort's pride, at Somerset's ambition,
At Buckingham, and all the crew of them,
Till they have snared the shepherd of the flock,
That virtuous prince, the good Duke Humphrey.
Shall find their deaths, if York can prophesy.
My lord, break we off. We know your mind at full.
My heart assures me that the Earl of Warwick
Shall one day make the Duke of York a king.
And, Neville, this I do assure myself:
Richard shall live to make the Earl of Warwick
The greatest man in England but the King.
Gloucester, who is accompanied by Margery Jourdain,
Southwell, Hume, and Bolingbroke, all guarded.]
Stand forth, Dame Eleanor Cobham, Gloucester's
In sight of God and us, your guilt is great.
Receive the sentence of the law for sins
Such as by God's book are adjudged to death.
You four, from hence to prison back again;
From thence unto the place of execution:
The witch in Smithfield shall be burnt to ashes,
And you three shall be strangled on the gallows.
Despoiled of your honor in your life,
Shall, after three days' open penance done,
Live in your country here in banishment
With Sir John Stanley in the Isle of Man.
Welcome is banishment. Welcome were my death.
Eleanor, the law, thou seest, hath judged thee.
Mine eyes are full of tears, my heart of grief.
Ah, Humphrey, this dishonor in thine age
Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground.--
Sorrow would solace, and mine age would ease.
Stay, Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester. Ere thou go,
Give up thy staff. Henry will to himself
Protector be; and God shall be my hope,
My stay, my guide, and lantern to my feet.
And go in peace, Humphrey, no less beloved
Than when thou wert Protector to thy king.
Should be to be protected like a child.
God and King Henry govern England's realm!--
Give up your staff, sir, and the King his realm.
My staff?--Here, noble Henry, is my staff.
As willingly do I the same resign
As e'er thy father Henry made it mine;
And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it
As others would ambitiously receive it.
Farewell, good king. When I am dead and gone,
May honorable peace attend thy throne.
Why, now is Henry king and Margaret queen,
And Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, scarce himself,
That bears so shrewd a maim. Two pulls at once:
His lady banished and a limb lopped off.
This staff of honor raught, there let it stand
Where it best fits to be, in Henry's hand.
Thus droops this lofty pine and hangs his sprays;
Thus Eleanor's pride dies in her youngest days.
Lords, let him go.--Please it your Majesty,
This is the day appointed for the combat,
And ready are the appellant and defendant--
The armorer and his man--to enter the lists,
So please your Highness to behold the fight.
Ay, good my lord, for purposely therefor
Left I the court to see this quarrel tried.
Here let them end it, and God defend the right!
Or more afraid to fight than is the appellant,
The servant of this armorer, my lords.
Neighbors, drinking to him so much that he is drunk;
Peter, with a Drum and sandbag, and Prentices
And a fig for Peter!	
And here, Tom, take all the money that I have. 
York, I will take my death I never meant him any
Peter, have at thee with a downright blow!
Sound, trumpets. Alarum to the combatants!
Go, take hence that traitor from our sight;
For by his death we do perceive his guilt.
And God in justice hath revealed to us
The truth and innocence of this poor fellow,
Which he had thought to have murdered
Come, fellow, follow us for thy reward.
Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud,
And after summer evermore succeeds
Barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold;
So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet.
Sirs, what's o'clock?
Ten is the hour that was appointed me
To watch the coming of my punished duchess.
Uneath may she endure the flinty streets,
To tread them with her tender-feeling feet.
Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrook
The abject people gazing on thy face
With envious looks laughing at thy shame,
That erst did follow thy proud chariot wheels
When thou didst ride in triumph through the streets.
But, soft! I think she comes, and I'll prepare
My tearstained eyes to see her miseries.
So please your Grace, we'll take her from the Sheriff.
No, stir not for your lives. Let her pass by.
Come you, my lord, to see my open shame?
Now thou dost penance too. Look how they gaze!
See how the giddy multitude do point,
And nod their heads, and throw their eyes on thee.
Ah, Gloucester, hide thee from their hateful looks,
And, in thy closet pent up, rue my shame,
And ban thine enemies, both mine and thine.
Be patient, gentle Nell. Forget this grief.
Ah, Gloucester, teach me to forget myself!
For whilst I think I am thy married wife
And thou a prince, Protector of this land,
Methinks I should not thus be led along,
Mailed up in shame, with papers on my back,
And followed with a rabble that rejoice
To see my tears and hear my deep-fet groans.
The ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet,
And when I start, the envious people laugh
And bid me be advised how I tread.
Ah, Humphrey, can I bear this shameful yoke?
Trowest thou that e'er I'll look upon the world
Or count them happy that enjoys the sun?
No, dark shall be my light, and night my day.
To think upon my pomp shall be my hell.
Sometimes I'll say I am Duke Humphrey's wife
And he a prince and ruler of the land;
Yet so he ruled and such a prince he was
As he stood by whilst I, his forlorn duchess,
Was made a wonder and a pointing-stock
To every idle rascal follower.
But be thou mild, and blush not at my shame,
Nor stir at nothing till the ax of death
Hang over thee, as, sure, it shortly will.
For Suffolk, he that can do all in all
With her that hateth thee and hates us all,
And York and impious Beaufort, that false priest,
Have all limed bushes to betray thy wings;
And fly thou how thou canst, they'll tangle thee.
But fear not thou until thy foot be snared,
Nor never seek prevention of thy foes.
Ah, Nell, forbear. Thou aimest all awry.
And had I twenty times so many foes,
And each of them had twenty times their power,
All these could not procure me any scathe
So long as I am loyal, true, and crimeless.
Wouldst have me rescue thee from this reproach?
Why, yet thy scandal were not wiped away,
But I in danger for the breach of law.
Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell.
These few days' wonder will be quickly worn.
Holden at Bury the first of this next month.
And my consent ne'er asked herein before?
This is close dealing. Well, I will be there.
My Nell, I take my leave.--And, master sheriff,
Let not her penance exceed the King's commission.
An 't please your Grace, here my commission stays,
And Sir John Stanley is appointed now
To take her with him to the Isle of Man.
Must you, Sir John, protect my lady here?
So am I given in charge, may 't please your Grace.
Entreat her not the worse in that I pray
You use her well. The world may laugh again,
And I may live to do you kindness, if
You do it her. And so, Sir John, farewell.
What, gone, my lord, and bid me not farewell?
Witness my tears. I cannot stay to speak.
Art thou gone too? All comfort go with thee,
For none abides with me. My joy is death--
Death, at whose name I oft have been afeard,
Because I wished this world's eternity.--
Stanley, I prithee, go, and take me hence.
Only convey me where thou art commanded.
Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man,
There to be used according to your state.
That's bad enough, for I am but reproach.
And shall I, then, be used reproachfully?
Like to a duchess and Duke Humphrey's lady;
According to that state you shall be used.
Sheriff, farewell, and better than I fare,
Although thou hast been conduct of my shame.
It is my office; and, madam, pardon me.
Ay, ay, farewell. Thy office is discharged.
Come, Stanley, shall we go?
Madam, your penance done, throw off this sheet,
And go we to attire you for our journey.
My shame will not be shifted with my sheet.
No, it will hang upon my richest robes
And show itself, attire me how I can.
Go, lead the way. I long to see my prison.
Cardinal, Suffolk, York, Buckingham, Salisbury, and
Warwick, and Others to the Parliament.]
Whate'er occasion keeps him from us now.
Can you not see, or will you not observe,
The strangeness of his altered countenance?
With what a majesty he bears himself,
How insolent of late he is become,
How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself?
We know the time since he was mild and affable;
And if we did but glance a far-off look,
Immediately he was upon his knee,
That all the court admired him for submission.
But meet him now, and, be it in the morn
When everyone will give the time of day,
He knits his brow and shows an angry eye
And passeth by with stiff unbowed knee,
Disdaining duty that to us belongs.
Small curs are not regarded when they grin,
But great men tremble when the lion roars--
And Humphrey is no little man in England.
First, note that he is near you in descent,
And, should you fall, he is the next will mount.
Meseemeth then it is no policy,
Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears
And his advantage following your decease,
That he should come about your royal person
Or be admitted to your Highness' Council.
By flattery hath he won the Commons' hearts;
And when he please to make commotion,
Now 'tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted;
Suffer them now, and they'll o'ergrow the garden
And choke the herbs for want of husbandry.
The reverent care I bear unto my lord
Made me collect these dangers in the Duke.
If it be fond, call it a woman's fear,
Which fear, if better reasons can supplant,
My lords of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,
Reprove my allegation if you can,
Or else conclude my words effectual.
Well hath your Highness seen into this duke,
And, had I first been put to speak my mind,
The Duchess by his subornation,
Upon my life, began her devilish practices;
Or if he were not privy to those faults,
Yet, by reputing of his high descent--
As next the King he was successive heir,
And such high vaunts of his nobility--
Did instigate the bedlam brainsick duchess
By wicked means to frame our sovereign's fall.
Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep,
And in his simple show he harbors treason.
The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb.
No, no, my sovereign, Gloucester is a man
Unsounded yet and full of deep deceit.
Did he not, contrary to form of law,
Devise strange deaths for small offenses done?
And did he not, in his protectorship,
Levy great sums of money through the realm
For soldiers' pay in France, and never sent it,
By means whereof the towns each day revolted?
Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown,
Which time will bring to light in smooth Duke
Humphrey.
My lords, at once: the care you have of us
To mow down thorns that would annoy our foot
Is worthy praise; but, shall I speak my conscience,
Our kinsman Gloucester is as innocent
From meaning treason to our royal person
As is the sucking lamb or harmless dove.
The Duke is virtuous, mild, and too well given
To dream on evil or to work my downfall.
Ah, what's more dangerous than this fond affiance?
Seems he a dove? His feathers are but borrowed,
For he's disposed as the hateful raven.
Is he a lamb? His skin is surely lent him,
For he's inclined as is the ravenous wolves.
Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit?
Take heed, my lord; the welfare of us all
Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.
All health unto my gracious sovereign!
Welcome, Lord Somerset. What news from France?
That all your interest in those territories
Is utterly bereft you. All is lost.
Cold news, Lord Somerset; but God's will be done.
Cold news for me, for I had hope of France
As firmly as I hope for fertile England.
Thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud,
And caterpillars eat my leaves away.
But I will remedy this gear ere long,
Or sell my title for a glorious grave.
All happiness unto my lord the King!
Pardon, my liege, that I have stayed so long.
Nay, Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon,
Unless thou wert more loyal than thou art.
Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush
Nor change my countenance for this arrest.
The purest spring is not so free from mud
As I am clear from treason to my sovereign.
Who can accuse me? Wherein am I guilty?
And, being Protector, stayed the soldiers' pay,
By means whereof his Highness hath lost France.
Is it but thought so? What are they that think it?
Nor ever had one penny bribe from France.
So help me God as I have watched the night--
Ay, night by night--in studying good for England!
That doit that e'er I wrested from the King,
Or any groat I hoarded to my use,
Be brought against me at my trial day!
No, many a pound of mine own proper store,
Because I would not tax the needy Commons,
Have I dispursed to the garrisons
And never asked for restitution.
It serves you well, my lord, to say so much.
In your protectorship, you did devise
Strange tortures for offenders, never heard of,
That England was defamed by tyranny.
Why, 'tis well known that whiles I was Protector,
Pity was all the fault that was in me;
For I should melt at an offender's tears,
And lowly words were ransom for their fault.
Unless it were a bloody murderer
Or foul felonious thief that fleeced poor passengers,
Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortured
Above the felon or what trespass else.
My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered;
But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge
Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself.
And here commit you to my Lord Cardinal
To keep until your further time of trial.
My lord of Gloucester, 'tis my special hope
That you will clear yourself from all suspense.
My conscience tells me you are innocent.
Ah, gracious lord, these days are dangerous.
Virtue is choked with foul ambition,
And charity chased hence by rancor's hand;
Foul subornation is predominant,
And equity exiled your Highness' land.
And if my death might make this island happy
And prove the period of their tyranny,
But mine is made the prologue to their play;
For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril,
Will not conclude their plotted tragedy.
Beaufort's red sparkling eyes blab his heart's malice,
And Suffolk's cloudy brow his stormy hate;
Sharp Buckingham unburdens with his tongue
The envious load that lies upon his heart;
And dogged York, that reaches at the moon,
Whose overweening arm I have plucked back,
By false accuse doth level at my life.--
And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest,
Causeless have laid disgraces on my head
And with your best endeavor have stirred up
My liefest liege to be mine enemy.
Ay, all of you have laid your heads together--
Myself had notice of your conventicles--
And all to make away my guiltless life.
Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt.
The ancient proverb will be well effected:
My liege, his railing is intolerable.
If those that care to keep your royal person
From treason's secret knife and traitor's rage
Be thus upbraided, chid, and rated at,
And the offender granted scope of speech,
Hath he not twit our sovereign lady here
With ignominious words, though clerkly couched,
As if she had suborned some to swear
False allegations to o'erthrow his state?
But I can give the loser leave to chide.
Far truer spoke than meant. I lose, indeed;
Beshrew the winners, for they played me false!
And well such losers may have leave to speak.
He'll wrest the sense and hold us here all day.
Lord Cardinal, he is your prisoner.
Sirs, take away the Duke, and guard him sure.
Ah, thus King Henry throws away his crutch
Before his legs be firm to bear his body.--
Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side,
And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.
Ah, that my fear were false; ah, that it were!
For, good King Henry, thy decay I fear.
My lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best
Do, or undo, as if ourself were here.
What, will your Highness leave the Parliament?
Ay, Margaret. My heart is drowned with grief,
Whose flood begins to flow within mine eyes,
My body round engirt with misery;
For what's more miserable than discontent?
Ah, uncle Humphrey, in thy face I see
The map of honor, truth, and loyalty;
And yet, good Humphrey, is the hour to come
That e'er I proved thee false or feared thy faith.
What louring star now envies thy estate
That these great lords and Margaret our queen
Do seek subversion of thy harmless life?
Thou never didst them wrong nor no man wrong.
And as the butcher takes away the calf
And binds the wretch and beats it when it strains,
Bearing it to the bloody slaughterhouse,
Even so remorseless have they borne him hence;
And as the dam runs lowing up and down,
Looking the way her harmless young one went,
And can do naught but wail her darling's loss,
Even so myself bewails good Gloucester's case
With sad unhelpful tears, and with dimmed eyes
Look after him and cannot do him good,
So mighty are his vowed enemies.
His fortunes I will weep and, 'twixt each groan,
Say "Who's a traitor, Gloucester he is none."
Free lords, cold snow melts with the sun's hot
Henry my lord is cold in great affairs,
Too full of foolish pity; and Gloucester's show
Beguiles him, as the mournful crocodile
With sorrow snares relenting passengers,
Or as the snake, rolled in a flow'ring bank,
With shining checkered slough, doth sting a child
That for the beauty thinks it excellent.
Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I--
And yet herein I judge mine own wit good--
This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world,
To rid us from the fear we have of him.
That he should die is worthy policy,
But yet we want a color for his death.
But, in my mind, that were no policy.
The King will labor still to save his life,
The Commons haply rise to save his life,
And yet we have but trivial argument,
More than mistrust, that shows him worthy death.
So that, by this, you would not have him die.
Ah, York, no man alive so fain as I!
But, my Lord Cardinal, and you, my lord of Suffolk,
Say as you think, and speak it from your souls:
Were 't not all one an empty eagle were set
To guard the chicken from a hungry kite
As place Duke Humphrey for the King's Protector?
So the poor chicken should be sure of death.
Madam, 'tis true; and were 't not madness then
To make the fox surveyor of the fold--
Who, being accused a crafty murderer,
His guilt should be but idly posted over
Because his purpose is not executed?
No, let him die in that he is a fox,
By nature proved an enemy to the flock,
Before his chaps be stained with crimson blood,
As Humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege.
And do not stand on quillets how to slay him--
Be it by gins, by snares, by subtlety,
Sleeping or waking. 'Tis no matter how,
So he be dead; for that is good deceit
Which mates him first that first intends deceit.
Thrice noble Suffolk, 'tis resolutely spoke.
Not resolute, except so much were done,
For things are often spoke and seldom meant;
But that my heart accordeth with my tongue,
Seeing the deed is meritorious,
And to preserve my sovereign from his foe,
Say but the word and I will be his priest.
But I would have him dead, my lord of Suffolk,
Ere you can take due orders for a priest.
Say you consent and censure well the deed,
And I'll provide his executioner.
Here is my hand. The deed is worthy doing.
And I. And now we three have spoke it,
It skills not greatly who impugns our doom.
Great lords, from Ireland am I come amain
To signify that rebels there are up
And put the Englishmen unto the sword.
Send succors, lords, and stop the rage betime,
Before the wound do grow uncurable;
For, being green, there is great hope of help.
What counsel give you in this weighty cause?
That Somerset be sent as regent thither.
Witness the fortune he hath had in France.
If York, with all his far-fet policy,
Had been the regent there instead of me,
He never would have stayed in France so long.
No, not to lose it all, as thou hast done.
Than bring a burden of dishonor home
By staying there so long till all were lost.
Show me one scar charactered on thy skin.
Men's flesh preserved so whole do seldom win.
Nay, then, this spark will prove a raging fire
If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with.--
No more, good York.--Sweet Somerset, be still.--
Thy fortune, York, hadst thou been regent there,
Might happily have proved far worse than his.
What, worse than naught? Nay, then, a shame take
And, in the number, thee that wishest shame!
My lord of York, try what your fortune is.
Th' uncivil kerns of Ireland are in arms
And temper clay with blood of Englishmen.
To Ireland will you lead a band of men,
Collected choicely, from each county some,
And try your hap against the Irishmen?
Why, our authority is his consent,
And what we do establish he confirms.
Then, noble York, take thou this task in hand.
Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.
But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey.
No more of him, for I will deal with him,
That henceforth he shall trouble us no more.
And so break off; the day is almost spent.
Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.
My lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days
At Bristow I expect my soldiers,
For there I'll ship them all for Ireland.
Now, York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts
And change misdoubt to resolution.
Be that thou hop'st to be, or what thou art
Resign to death; it is not worth th' enjoying.
Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born man
And find no harbor in a royal heart.
Faster than springtime showers comes thought on
And not a thought but thinks on dignity.
My brain, more busy than the laboring spider,
Weaves tedious snares to trap mine enemies.
Well, nobles, well, 'tis politicly done
To send me packing with an host of men.
Who, cherished in your breasts, will sting your
You put sharp weapons in a madman's hands.
Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty band,
Shall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell;
And this fell tempest shall not cease to rage
Until the golden circuit on my head,
Like to the glorious sun's transparent beams,
Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw.
And for a minister of my intent,
John Cade of Ashford,
To make commotion, as full well he can,
Under the title of John Mortimer.
In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade
Oppose himself against a troop of kerns,
And fought so long till that his thighs with darts
Were almost like a sharp-quilled porpentine;
And in the end being rescued, I have seen
Him caper upright like a wild Morisco,
Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells.
Full often, like a shag-haired crafty kern,
Hath he conversed with the enemy,
And undiscovered come to me again
And given me notice of their villainies.
This devil here shall be my substitute;
For that John Mortimer, which now is dead,
In face, in gait, in speech he doth resemble.
By this, I shall perceive the Commons' mind,
How they affect the house and claim of York.
Say he be taken, racked, and tortured,
Will make him say I moved him to those arms.
Say that he thrive, as 'tis great like he will,
Why then from Ireland come I with my strength
And reap the harvest which that rascal sowed.
For, Humphrey being dead, as he shall be,
And Henry put apart, the next for me.
Run to my lord of Suffolk. Let him know
We have dispatched the Duke as he commanded.
Didst ever hear a man so penitent?
Why, that's well said. Go, get you to my house;
The King and all the peers are here at hand.
Have you laid fair the bed? Is all things well,
According as I gave directions?
Margaret, Cardinal, Somerset, with Attendants.]
Go, call our uncle to our presence straight.
Say we intend to try his Grace today
If he be guilty, as 'tis published.
Lords, take your places; and, I pray you all,
Proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle Gloucester
Than from true evidence of good esteem
He be approved in practice culpable.
God forbid any malice should prevail
That faultless may condemn a nobleman!
Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion!
How now? Why look'st thou pale? Why tremblest
Where is our uncle? What's the matter, Suffolk?
Dead in his bed, my lord. Gloucester is dead.
God's secret judgment. I did dream tonight
The Duke was dumb and could not speak a word.
How fares my lord? Help, lords, the King is dead!
Rear up his body. Wring him by the nose.
Run, go, help, help! O Henry, ope thine eyes!
He doth revive again. Madam, be patient.
Comfort, my sovereign! Gracious Henry, comfort!
What, doth my lord of Suffolk comfort me?
Came he right now to sing a raven's note,
Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers,
And thinks he that the chirping of a wren,
By crying comfort from a hollow breast,
Can chase away the first-conceived sound?
Hide not thy poison with such sugared words.
Lay not thy hands on me. Forbear, I say!
Their touch affrights me as a serpent's sting.
Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight!
Upon thy eyeballs, murderous Tyranny
Sits in grim majesty to fright the world.
Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding.
Yet do not go away. Come, basilisk,
And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight;
For in the shade of death I shall find joy,
In life but double death, now Gloucester's dead.
Why do you rate my lord of Suffolk thus?
Although the Duke was enemy to him,
Yet he most Christian-like laments his death.
And for myself, foe as he was to me,
Might liquid tears or heart-offending groans
Or blood-consuming sighs recall his life,
Look pale as primrose with blood-drinking sighs,
And all to have the noble duke alive.
What know I how the world may deem of me?
For it is known we were but hollow friends.
It may be judged I made the Duke away;
So shall my name with slander's tongue be wounded
And princes' courts be filled with my reproach.
This get I by his death. Ay me, unhappy,
To be a queen and crowned with infamy!
Ah, woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man!
Be woe for me, more wretched than he is.
What, dost thou turn away and hide thy face?
What, art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf?
Be poisonous too, and kill thy forlorn queen.
Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucester's tomb?
Why, then, Dame Margaret was ne'er thy joy.
Erect his statue and worship it,
And make my image but an alehouse sign.
Was I for this nigh-wracked upon the sea
And twice by awkward wind from England's bank
Drove back again unto my native clime?
What boded this, but well forewarning wind
Did seem to say "Seek not a scorpion's nest,
Nor set no footing on this unkind shore"?
What did I then but cursed the gentle gusts
And he that loosed them forth their brazen caves
And bid them blow towards England's blessed shore
Or turn our stern upon a dreadful rock?
Yet Aeolus would not be a murderer,
But left that hateful office unto thee.
The pretty-vaulting sea refused to drown me,
Knowing that thou wouldst have me drowned on
With tears as salt as sea, through thy unkindness.
The splitting rocks cow'red in the sinking sands
And would not dash me with their ragged sides
Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they,
Might in thy palace perish Margaret.
As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs,
When from thy shore the tempest beat us back,
And when the dusky sky began to rob
My earnest-gaping sight of thy land's view,
And threw it towards thy land. The sea received it,
And so I wished thy body might my heart.
And even with this I lost fair England's view,
And bid mine eyes be packing with my heart,
And called them blind and dusky spectacles
For losing ken of Albion's wished coast.
How often have I tempted Suffolk's tongue,
The agent of thy foul inconstancy,
To sit and watch me, as Ascanius did
When he to madding Dido would unfold
His father's acts commenced in burning Troy!
Am I not witched like her, or thou not false like
Ay me, I can no more. Die, Margaret,
For Henry weeps that thou dost live so long.
It is reported, mighty sovereign,
That good Duke Humphrey traitorously is murdered
By Suffolk and the Cardinal Beaufort's means.
The Commons, like an angry hive of bees
That want their leader, scatter up and down
And care not who they sting in his revenge.
Myself have calmed their spleenful mutiny,
Until they hear the order of his death.
That he is dead, good Warwick, 'tis too true;
But how he died God knows, not Henry.
Enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse,
And comment then upon his sudden death.
That shall I do, my liege.--Stay, Salisbury,
With the rude multitude till I return.
Commons exit through another.]
My thoughts that labor to persuade my soul
Some violent hands were laid on Humphrey's life.
If my suspect be false, forgive me, God,
For judgment only doth belong to Thee.
Fain would I go to chafe his paly lips
With twenty thousand kisses, and to drain
Upon his face an ocean of salt tears,
To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk
And with my fingers feel his hand unfeeling;
But all in vain are these mean obsequies.
And to survey his dead and earthy image,
What were it but to make my sorrow greater?
Enter Warwick.]
Come hither, gracious sovereign. View this body.
That is to see how deep my grave is made,
For with his soul fled all my worldly solace;
For seeing him, I see my life in death.
As surely as my soul intends to live
With that dread King that took our state upon Him
To free us from His Father's wrathful curse,
Upon the life of this thrice-famed duke.
What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow?
See how the blood is settled in his face.
Oft have I seen a timely-parted ghost,
Of ashy semblance, meager, pale, and bloodless,
Being all descended to the laboring heart,
Who, in the conflict that it holds with death,
Attracts the same for aidance 'gainst the enemy,
Which with the heart there cools and ne'er
To blush and beautify the cheek again.
But see, his face is black and full of blood;
His eyeballs further out than when he lived,
Staring full ghastly, like a strangled man;
His hair upreared, his nostrils stretched with
His hands abroad displayed, as one that grasped
And tugged for life and was by strength subdued.
Look, on the sheets his hair, you see, is sticking;
His well-proportioned beard made rough and
Like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged.
It cannot be but he was murdered here.
The least of all these signs were probable.
Why, Warwick, who should do the Duke to death?
Myself and Beaufort had him in protection,
And we, I hope, sir, are no murderers.
But both of you were vowed Duke Humphrey's foes,
And 'tis well seen he found an enemy.
Then you, belike, suspect these noblemen
As guilty of Duke Humphrey's timeless death.
Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh,
And sees fast by a butcher with an ax,
But will suspect 'twas he that made the slaughter?
Who finds the partridge in the puttock's nest
But may imagine how the bird was dead,
Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak?
Even so suspicious is this tragedy.
Are you the butcher, Suffolk? Where's your knife?
Is Beaufort termed a kite? Where are his talons?
But here's a vengeful sword, rusted with ease,
That shall be scoured in his rancorous heart
That slanders me with murder's crimson badge.--
Say, if thou dar'st, proud lord of Warwickshire,
That I am faulty in Duke Humphrey's death.
What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?
He dares not calm his contumelious spirit
Nor cease to be an arrogant controller,
Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.
Madam, be still--with reverence may I say--
For every word you speak in his behalf
Is slander to your royal dignity.
Blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanor!
If ever lady wronged her lord so much,
Thy mother took into her blameful bed
Some stern untutored churl, and noble stock
Was graft with crab-tree slip, whose fruit thou art
And never of the Nevilles' noble race.
But that the guilt of murder bucklers thee
And I should rob the deathsman of his fee,
Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,
And that my sovereign's presence makes me mild,
Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech
And say it was thy mother that thou meant'st,
That thou thyself wast born in bastardy;
And after all this fearful homage done,
Give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell,
Pernicious bloodsucker of sleeping men!
Thou shalt be waking while I shed thy blood,
If from this presence thou dar'st go with me.
Away even now, or I will drag thee hence!
Unworthy though thou art, I'll cope with thee
And do some service to Duke Humphrey's ghost.
What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted?
Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just,
And he but naked, though locked up in steel,
Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.
Why, how now, lords? Your wrathful weapons
Here in our presence? Dare you be so bold?
Why, what tumultuous clamor have we here?
The trait'rous Warwick, with the men of Bury,
Set all upon me, mighty sovereign.
Sirs, stand apart. The King shall know your mind.--
Dread lord, the Commons send you word by me,
Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death
Or banished fair England's territories,
They will by violence tear him from your palace
And torture him with grievous ling'ring death.
They say, by him the good duke Humphrey died;
They say, in him they fear your Highness' death;
And mere instinct of love and loyalty,
Free from a stubborn opposite intent,
As being thought to contradict your liking,
Makes them thus forward in his banishment.
They say, in care of your most royal person,
That if your Highness should intend to sleep,
And charge that no man should disturb your rest,
In pain of your dislike or pain of death,
Yet, notwithstanding such a strait edict,
Were there a serpent seen with forked tongue
That slyly glided towards your Majesty,
It were but necessary you were waked,
Lest, being suffered in that harmful slumber,
The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal.
And therefore do they cry, though you forbid,
That they will guard you, whe'er you will or no,
From such fell serpents as false Suffolk is,
With whose envenomed and fatal sting
Your loving uncle, twenty times his worth,
They say, is shamefully bereft of life.
An answer from the King, my lord of Salisbury!
Could send such message to their sovereign!
To show how quaint an orator you are.
But all the honor Salisbury hath won
Is that he was the lord ambassador
Sent from a sort of tinkers to the King.
An answer from the King, or we will all break in.
Go, Salisbury, and tell them all from me,
And, had I not been cited so by them,
Yet did I purpose as they do entreat.
For, sure, my thoughts do hourly prophesy
Mischance unto my state by Suffolk's means.
And therefore, by His Majesty I swear,
Whose far unworthy deputy I am,
He shall not breathe infection in this air
But three days longer, on the pain of death.
Ungentle queen to call him gentle Suffolk!
No more, I say. If thou dost plead for him,
Thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath.
Had I but said, I would have kept my word;
But when I swear, it is irrevocable.
On any ground that I am ruler of,
The world shall not be ransom for thy life.--
Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me.
Warwick]
Mischance and sorrow go along with you!
Heart's discontent and sour affliction
Be playfellows to keep you company!
There's two of you; the devil make a third,
And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps!
Cease, gentle queen, these execrations,
And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.
Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch!
Hast thou not spirit to curse thine enemies?
Could curses kill, as doth the mandrake's groan,
As curst, as harsh, and horrible to hear,
Delivered strongly through my fixed teeth,
With full as many signs of deadly hate,
As lean-faced Envy in her loathsome cave.
My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words;
Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint;
Mine hair be fixed on end, as one distract;
Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban;
And even now my burdened heart would break
Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink!
Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste;
Their sweetest shade, a grove of cypress trees;
Their chiefest prospect, murd'ring basilisks;
Their softest touch, as smart as lizards' stings!
Their music, frightful as the serpent's hiss,
And boding screech owls make the consort full!
All the foul terrors in dark-seated hell--
Enough, sweet Suffolk, thou torment'st thyself,
And these dread curses, like the sun 'gainst glass,
Or like an over-charged gun, recoil
And turn the force of them upon thyself.
You bade me ban, and will you bid me leave?
Now, by the ground that I am banished from,
Well could I curse away a winter's night,
Though standing naked on a mountain top
Where biting cold would never let grass grow,
And think it but a minute spent in sport.
That I may dew it with my mournful tears;
Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place
To wash away my woeful monuments.
That thou mightst think upon these by the seal,
Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for
So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief;
As one that surfeits thinking on a want.
Adventure to be banished myself;
And banished I am, if but from thee.
Go, speak not to me. Even now be gone!
Embrace and kiss and take ten thousand leaves,
Loather a hundred times to part than die.
Yet now farewell, and farewell life with thee.
Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished,
Once by the King, and three times thrice by thee.
So Suffolk had thy heavenly company;
For where thou art, there is the world itself,
With every several pleasure in the world;
And where thou art not, desolation.
Myself no joy in naught but that thou liv'st.
Whither goes Vaux so fast? What news, I prithee?
That Cardinal Beaufort is at point of death;
For suddenly a grievous sickness took him
That makes him gasp and stare and catch the air,
Blaspheming God and cursing men on Earth.
Sometimes he talks as if Duke Humphrey's ghost
Were by his side; sometimes he calls the King
And whispers to his pillow, as to him,
The secrets of his overcharged soul.
And I am sent to tell his Majesty
That even now he cries aloud for him.
Go, tell this heavy message to the King.	
Ay me! What is this world? What news are these!
But wherefore grieve I at an hour's poor loss,
Omitting Suffolk's exile, my soul's treasure?
Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee,
And with the southern clouds contend in tears--
Theirs for the earth's increase, mine for my
Now get thee hence. The King, thou know'st, is
If thou be found by me, thou art but dead.
If I depart from thee, I cannot live;
And in thy sight to die, what were it else
But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?
Here could I breathe my soul into the air,
As mild and gentle as the cradle babe
Dying with mother's dug between its lips;
Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad
And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes,
To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth.
So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul,
Or I should breathe it so into thy body,
And then it lived in sweet Elysium.
To die by thee were but to die in jest;
From thee to die were torture more than death.
Away! Though parting be a fretful corrosive,
It is applied to a deathful wound.
To France, sweet Suffolk. Let me hear from thee,
For wheresoe'er thou art in this world's globe,
That ever did contain a thing of worth!
Even as a splitted bark, so sunder we.
This way fall I to death.
Cardinal in bed, raving and staring.]
How fares my lord? Speak, Beaufort, to thy sovereign.
If thou be'st Death, I'll give thee England's treasure,
Enough to purchase such another island,
So thou wilt let me live and feel no pain.
Ah, what a sign it is of evil life,
Where Death's approach is seen so terrible!
Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.
Bring me unto my trial when you will.
Died he not in his bed? Where should he die?
Can I make men live, whe'er they will or no?
Alive again? Then show me where he is.
He hath no eyes! The dust hath blinded them.
Comb down his hair. Look, look. It stands upright,
Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul.
Give me some drink, and bid the apothecary
Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.
Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch!
That lays strong siege unto this wretch's soul,
And from his bosom purge this black despair!
See how the pangs of death do make him grin!
Disturb him not. Let him pass peaceably.
Peace to his soul, if God's good pleasure be!--
Lord Card'nal, if thou think'st on heaven's bliss,
Hold up thy hand; make signal of thy hope.
He dies and makes no sign. O, God forgive him!
So bad a death argues a monstrous life.
Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.
Close up his eyes, and draw the curtain close,
And let us all to meditation.
Enter Lieutenant, Suffolk, captive and in disguise,
Walter Whitmore, and Prisoners.]
The gaudy, blabbing, and remorseful day
Is crept into the bosom of the sea,
And now loud-howling wolves arouse the jades
That drag the tragic melancholy night,
Who, with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings
Clip dead men's graves, and from their misty jaws
Breathe foul contagious darkness in the air.
Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize;
For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs,
Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,
Or with their blood stain this discolored shore.--
Master, this prisoner freely give I thee.--
And, thou that art his mate, make boot of this.--
The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share.
What is my ransom, master? Let me know.
And so much shall you give, or off goes yours.
What, think you much to pay two thousand crowns,
And bear the name and port of gentlemen?--
Cut both the villains' throats--for die you shall;
The lives of those which we have lost in fight
Be counterpoised with such a petty sum!
And so will I, and write home for it straight.
And therefore to revenge it shalt thou die;
And so should these, if I might have my will.
Be not so rash. Take ransom; let him live.
Look on my George; I am a gentleman.
Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid.
And so am I. My name is Walter Whitmore.
How now, why starts thou? What, doth death
Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death.
And told me that by water I should die.
Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded;
Thy name is Gualtier, being rightly sounded.
Gualtier or Walter, which it is, I care not.
Never yet did base dishonor blur our name
But with our sword we wiped away the blot.
Therefore, when merchantlike I sell revenge,
Broke be my sword, my arms torn and defaced,
And I proclaimed a coward through the world!
Stay, Whitmore, for thy prisoner is a prince,
The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Pole.
The Duke of Suffolk muffled up in rags?
Ay, but these rags are no part of the Duke.
Jove sometimes went disguised, and why not I?
But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be.
Obscure and lousy swain, King Henry's blood,
The honorable blood of Lancaster,
Must not be shed by such a jaded groom.
Hast thou not kissed thy hand and held my stirrup?
Bareheaded plodded by my footcloth mule,
And thought thee happy when I shook my head?
How often hast thou waited at my cup,
Fed from my trencher, kneeled down at the board,
When I have feasted with Queen Margaret?
Remember it, and let it make thee crestfall'n,
Ay, and allay this thy abortive pride.
How in our voiding lobby hast thou stood
And duly waited for my coming forth?
This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf,
And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.
Speak, captain, shall I stab the forlorn swain?
First let my words stab him as he hath me.
Base slave, thy words are blunt, and so art thou.
Convey him hence, and on our longboat's side,
Strike off his head.
Yes, Pole.
Ay, kennel, puddle, sink, whose filth and dirt
Troubles the silver spring where England drinks!
Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth
For swallowing the treasure of the realm.
Thy lips that kissed the Queen shall sweep the
And thou that smiledst at good Duke Humphrey's
Against the senseless winds shall grin in vain,
Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again.
And wedded be thou to the hags of hell
For daring to affy a mighty lord
Unto the daughter of a worthless king,
Having neither subject, wealth, nor diadem.
By devilish policy art thou grown great,
And, like ambitious Sylla, overgorged
With gobbets of thy mother's bleeding heart.
By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France.
The false revolting Normans thorough thee
Disdain to call us lord, and Picardy
Hath slain their governors, surprised our forts,
And sent the ragged soldiers wounded home.
The princely Warwick, and the Nevilles all,
Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain,
As hating thee, are rising up in arms.
And now the house of York, thrust from the crown
By shameful murder of a guiltless king
And lofty, proud, encroaching tyranny,
Burns with revenging fire, whose hopeful colors
Advance our half-faced sun, striving to shine,
Under the which is writ "Invitis nubibus."
The commons here in Kent are up in arms,
And, to conclude, reproach and beggary
Is crept into the palace of our king,
And all by thee.--Away! Convey him hence.
Upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges!
Small things make base men proud. This villain
Being captain of a pinnace, threatens more
Than Bargulus, the strong Illyrian pirate.
Drones suck not eagles' blood, but rob beehives.
It is impossible that I should die
By such a lowly vassal as thyself.
Thy words move rage and not remorse in me.
Come, Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.
Paene gelidus timor occupat artus.
It is thee I fear.
Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.
What, are you daunted now? Now will you stoop?
My gracious lord, entreat him; speak him fair.
Suffolk's imperial tongue is stern and rough,
Used to command, untaught to plead for favor.
Far be it we should honor such as these
With humble suit. No, rather let my head
Stoop to the block than these knees bow to any
Save to the God of heaven and to my king;
And sooner dance upon a bloody pole
Than stand uncovered to the vulgar groom.
True nobility is exempt from fear.--
More can I bear than you dare execute.
Hale him away, and let him talk no more.
Come, soldiers, show what cruelty you can,
That this my death may never be forgot!
Great men oft die by vile bezonians:
Murdered sweet Tully; Brutus' bastard hand
Stabbed Julius Caesar; savage islanders
Pompey the Great, and Suffolk dies by pirates.
Suffolk and Others.]
And as for these whose ransom we have set,
It is our pleasure one of them depart.
The First Gentleman remains.]
There let his head and lifeless body lie,
Until the Queen his mistress bury it.
His body will I bear unto the King.
If he revenge it not, yet will his friends.
So will the Queen, that living held him dear.
What is thy name?
He is but a knight, is he?
Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent,
Marked for the gallows, lay your weapons down!
Home to your cottages; forsake this groom.
The King is merciful, if you revolt.
But angry, wrathful, and inclined to blood,
If you go forward. Therefore yield, or die.
As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not.
It is to you, good people, that I speak,
Over whom, in time to come, I hope to reign,
For I am rightful heir unto the crown.
Villain, thy father was a plasterer,
And thou thyself a shearman, art thou not?
And Adam was a gardener.
Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March,
Married the Duke of Clarence' daughter, did he not?
By her he had two children at one birth.
Ay, there's the question. But I say 'tis true.
The elder of them, being put to nurse,
Was by a beggar-woman stol'n away,
And, ignorant of his birth and parentage,
Became a bricklayer when he came to age.
His son am I. Deny it if you can.
Nay, 'tis too true. Therefore he shall be king.
Therefore deny it not.
And will you credit this base drudge's words,
That speaks he knows not what?
Ay, marry, will we. Therefore get you gone.
Jack Cade, the Duke of York hath taught you this.
Saye hath gelded the commonwealth and made it
French, and therefore he is a traitor.
Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail,
Assail them with the army of the King.
Herald, away, and throughout every town
Proclaim them traitors that are up with Cade,
That those which fly before the battle ends
May, even in their wives' and children's sight
Be hanged up for example at their doors.--
And you that be the King's friends, follow me.
And you that love the Commons, follow me.
Now show yourselves men. 'Tis for liberty!
We will not leave one lord, one gentleman;
Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon,
For they are thrifty, honest men and such
As would, but that they dare not, take our parts.
Sir Humphrey Stafford's armor and helmet, or sallet.]
And the bodies shall be dragged at my horse
Queen Margaret with Suffolk's head, the Duke
Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind
And makes it fearful and degenerate.
Think therefore on revenge, and cease to weep.
But who can cease to weep and look on this?
Here may his head lie on my throbbing breast,
But where's the body that I should embrace?
What answer makes your Grace to the rebels'
For God forbid so many simple souls
Should perish by the sword! And I myself,
Rather than bloody war shall cut them short,
Will parley with Jack Cade, their general.
But stay, I'll read it over once again.	
Ah, barbarous villains! Hath this lovely face
Ruled, like a wandering planet, over me,
And could it not enforce them to relent
That were unworthy to behold the same?
Lord Saye, Jack Cade hath sworn to have thy head.
Ay, but I hope your Highness shall have his.
Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolk's death?
Thou wouldst not have mourned so much for me.
No, my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee.
How now, what news? Why com'st thou in such
The rebels are in Southwark. Fly, my lord!
Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer,
Descended from the Duke of Clarence' house,
And calls your Grace usurper, openly,
And vows to crown himself in Westminster.
His army is a ragged multitude
Of hinds and peasants, rude and merciless.
Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother's death
Hath given them heart and courage to proceed.
All scholars, lawyers, courtiers, gentlemen
They call false caterpillars and intend their death.
My gracious lord, retire to Killingworth
Until a power be raised to put them down.
Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive,
These Kentish rebels would be soon appeased!
Therefore away with us to Killingworth.
So might your Grace's person be in danger.
The sight of me is odious in their eyes;
And therefore in this city will I stay
And live alone as secret as I may.
Jack Cade hath gotten London Bridge.
The citizens fly and forsake their houses.
The rascal people, thirsting after prey,
Join with the traitor, and they jointly swear
To spoil the city and your royal court.
Then linger not, my lord. Away! Take horse!
Come, Margaret. God, our hope, will succor us.
My hope is gone, now Suffolk is deceased.
Farewell, my lord. Trust not the Kentish rebels.
Trust nobody, for fear you be betrayed.
The trust I have is in mine innocence,
And therefore am I bold and resolute.
Such aid as I can spare you shall command;
But I am troubled here with them myself:
The rebels have essayed to win the Tower.
But get you to Smithfield and gather head,
And thither I will send you Matthew Gough.
Fight for your king, your country, and your lives.
And so farewell, for I must hence again.
London Stone.]
And now henceforward it shall be treason for any
Cade more. I think he hath a very fair warning.
My lord, there's an army gathered together in
Smithfield.
Then enter Jack Cade with his company.]
Burn all the records of the realm. My mouth shall
Saye, which sold the towns in France, he that
Thou hast appointed justices of peace to call poor
Latin.
Hear me but speak, and bear me where you will.
Kent, in the commentaries Caesar writ,
Is termed the civil'st place of all this isle.
Sweet is the country, because full of riches;
The people liberal, valiant, active, wealthy;
Which makes me hope you are not void of pity.
Yet to recover them would lose my life.
Justice with favor have I always done;
Prayers and tears have moved me; gifts could never.
When have I aught exacted at your hands
Kent to maintain, the King, the realm, and you?
Large gifts have I bestowed on learned clerks,
Because my book preferred me to the King.
And seeing ignorance is the curse of God,
Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven,
Unless you be possessed with devilish spirits,
You cannot but forbear to murder me.
This tongue hath parleyed unto foreign kings
For your behoof--
Great men have reaching hands. Oft have I struck
Those that I never saw, and struck them dead.
These cheeks are pale for watching for your good.
Long sitting to determine poor men's causes
Hath made me full of sickness and diseases.
Tell me, wherein have I offended most?
Have I affected wealth or honor? Speak.
Are my chests filled up with extorted gold?
Is my apparel sumptuous to behold?
Whom have I injured, that you seek my death?
These hands are free from guiltless blood-shedding,
This breast from harboring foul deceitful thoughts.
Ah, countrymen, if when you make your prayers,
God should be so obdurate as yourselves,
How would it fare with your departed souls?
And therefore yet relent, and save my life.
The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a
There shall not a maid be married but she shall
Cromer on poles.]
Kill and knock down! Throw them into Thames!
What noise is this I hear? Dare any be so bold to
Ay, here they be that dare and will disturb thee.
Know, Cade, we come ambassadors from the King
Unto the Commons, whom thou hast misled,
And here pronounce free pardon to them all
That will forsake thee and go home in peace.
What say you, countrymen? Will you relent
And yield to mercy whil'st 'tis offered you,
Or let a rabble lead you to your deaths?
Who loves the King and will embrace his pardon,
Fling up his cap and say "God save his Majesty!"
Who hateth him and honors not his father,
Henry the Fifth, that made all France to quake,
Shake he his weapon at us and pass by.
That thus you do exclaim you'll go with him?
Will he conduct you through the heart of France
And make the meanest of you earls and dukes?
Alas, he hath no home, no place to fly to,
Nor knows he how to live but by the spoil,
Unless by robbing of your friends and us.
Were 't not a shame that, whilst you live at jar,
The fearful French, whom you late vanquished,
Should make a start o'er seas and vanquish you?
Methinks already in this civil broil
Crying "Villiago!" unto all they meet.
Better ten thousand baseborn Cades miscarry
Than you should stoop unto a Frenchman's mercy.
To France, to France, and get what you have lost!
Spare England, for it is your native coast.
Henry hath money; you are strong and manly.
God on our side, doubt not of victory.
Clifford!
And heavens and honor be witness that no want of
What, is he fled? Go, some, and follow him;
And he that brings his head unto the King
Shall have a thousand crowns for his reward.
Follow me, soldiers. We'll devise a means
To reconcile you all unto the King.
Was ever king that joyed an earthly throne
And could command no more content than I?
No sooner was I crept out of my cradle
But I was made a king at nine months old.
Was never subject longed to be a king
As I do long and wish to be a subject!
Health and glad tidings to your Majesty!
Why, Buckingham, is the traitor Cade surprised,
Or is he but retired to make him strong?
He is fled, my lord, and all his powers do yield
And, humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
Expect your Highness' doom of life or death.
Then, heaven, set ope thy everlasting gates
To entertain my vows of thanks and praise!
Soldiers, this day have you redeemed your lives
And showed how well you love your prince and
Continue still in this so good a mind,
And Henry, though he be infortunate,
Assure yourselves, will never be unkind.
And so with thanks and pardon to you all,
Please it your Grace to be advertised
The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland
And, with a puissant and a mighty power
Of gallowglasses and stout kerns,
Is marching hitherward in proud array,
And still proclaimeth, as he comes along,
His arms are only to remove from thee
The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms a traitor.
Thus stands my state, 'twixt Cade and York
Like to a ship that, having scaped a tempest,
Is straightway calmed and boarded with a pirate.
But now is Cade driven back, his men dispersed,
And now is York in arms to second him.
And ask him what's the reason of these arms.
Tell him I'll send Duke Edmund to the Tower.--
And, Somerset, we will commit thee thither
Until his army be dismissed from him.
Or unto death, to do my country good.
In any case, be not too rough in terms,
For he is fierce and cannot brook hard language.
As all things shall redound unto your good.
Come, wife, let's in, and learn to govern better,
For yet may England curse my wretched reign.
Wherefore, o'er a brick wall have I climbed into
Lord, who would live turmoiled in the court
And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
This small inheritance my father left me
Contenteth me, and worth a monarchy.
Or gather wealth, I care not with what envy.
Sufficeth that I have maintains my state
And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.
Why, rude companion, whatsoe'er thou be,
Is 't not enough to break into my garden
And, like a thief, to come to rob my grounds,
Climbing my walls in spite of me the owner,
But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms?
Nay, it shall ne'er be said, while England stands,
That Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent,
Took odds to combat a poor famished man.
Oppose thy steadfast gazing eyes to mine;
See if thou canst outface me with thy looks.
Set limb to limb, and thou art far the lesser;
Thy hand is but a finger to my fist,
Thy leg a stick compared with this truncheon.
My foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast;
And if mine arm be heaved in the air,
Thy grave is digged already in the earth.
As for words, whose greatness answers words,
Let this my sword report what speech forbears.
Let ten thousand devils come against me, and give
Is 't Cade that I have slain, that monstrous traitor?
Sword, I will hallow thee for this thy deed,
And hang thee o'er my tomb when I am dead.
Ne'er shall this blood be wiped from thy point,
But thou shalt wear it as a herald's coat
To emblaze the honor that thy master got.
Kent from me she hath lost her best man, and
How much thou wrong'st me, heaven be my judge!
Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee!
And as I thrust thy body in with my sword,
So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell.
Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heels
Unto a dunghill, which shall be thy grave,
And there cut off thy most ungracious head,
Which I will bear in triumph to the King,
Leaving thy trunk for crows to feed upon.
Irish, with Attendants, Drum and Colors.]
From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right
And pluck the crown from feeble Henry's head.
Ring, bells, aloud! Burn, bonfires, clear and bright
To entertain great England's lawful king!
Ah, sancta maiestas, who would not buy thee dear?
Let them obey that knows not how to rule.
This hand was made to handle naught but gold.
Except a sword or scepter balance it.
On which I'll toss the fleur-de-luce of France.
The King hath sent him, sure. I must dissemble.
York, if thou meanest well, I greet thee well.
Humphrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting.
Art thou a messenger, or come of pleasure?
To know the reason of these arms in peace;
Or why thou, being a subject as I am,
Against thy oath and true allegiance sworn,
Should raise so great a power without his leave,
Or dare to bring thy force so near the court.
Scarce can I speak, my choler is so great.
And now, like Ajax Telamonius,
On sheep or oxen could I spend my fury.
More like a king, more kingly in my thoughts.
But I must make fair weather yet awhile,
Till Henry be more weak and I more strong.--
Buckingham, I prithee, pardon me,
That I have given no answer all this while.
My mind was troubled with deep melancholy.
The cause why I have brought this army hither
Is to remove proud Somerset from the King,
Seditious to his Grace and to the state.
That is too much presumption on thy part.
But if thy arms be to no other end,
The King hath yielded unto thy demand:
The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.
Upon thine honor, is he prisoner?
Upon mine honor, he is prisoner.
Then, Buckingham, I do dismiss my powers.--
Soldiers, I thank you all. Disperse yourselves.
Meet me tomorrow in Saint George's field;
You shall have pay and everything you wish.
And let my sovereign, virtuous Henry,
Command my eldest son, nay, all my sons,
As pledges of my fealty and love;
Lands, goods, horse, armor, anything I have
Is his to use, so Somerset may die.
York, I commend this kind submission.
We twain will go into his Highness' tent.
Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to us
That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm?
In all submission and humility
York doth present himself unto your Highness.
Then what intends these forces thou dost bring?
To heave the traitor Somerset from hence
And fight against that monstrous rebel Cade,
Who since I heard to be discomfited.
If one so rude and of so mean condition
May pass into the presence of a king,
Lo, I present your Grace a traitor's head,
The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.
The head of Cade? Great God, how just art Thou!
That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.
Tell me, my friend, art thou the man that slew him?
How art thou called? And what is thy degree?
Alexander Iden, that's my name,
So please it you, my lord, 'twere not amiss
He were created knight for his good service.
Iden, kneel down.  Rise up a knight. 
We give thee for reward a thousand marks,
And will that thou henceforth attend on us.
May Iden live to merit such a bounty,
And never live but true unto his liege!
See, Buckingham, Somerset comes with th' Queen.
Go bid her hide him quickly from the Duke.
For thousand Yorks he shall not hide his head,
But boldly stand and front him to his face.
How now? Is Somerset at liberty?
Then, York, unloose thy long-imprisoned thoughts,
And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart.
Shall I endure the sight of Somerset?--
False king, why hast thou broken faith with me,
Knowing how hardly I can brook abuse?
Not fit to govern and rule multitudes,
Which dar'st not--no, nor canst not--rule a traitor.
That head of thine doth not become a crown;
Thy hand is made to grasp a palmer's staff,
And not to grace an awful princely scepter.
That gold must round engirt these brows of mine,
Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles' spear,
Is able with the change to kill and cure.
Here is a hand to hold a scepter up
And with the same to act controlling laws.
Give place. By heaven, thou shalt rule no more
Of capital treason 'gainst the King and crown.
Obey, audacious traitor. Kneel for grace.
Wouldst have me kneel? First let me ask of these
If they can brook I bow a knee to man.
They'll pawn their swords for my enfranchisement.
Call hither Clifford; bid him come amain,
To say if that the bastard boys of York
Shall be the surety for their traitor father.
Outcast of Naples, England's bloody scourge!
The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,
Shall be their father's bail, and bane to those
That for my surety will refuse the boys.
See where they come; I'll warrant they'll make it
And here comes Clifford to deny their bail.
Health and all happiness to my lord the King.
Nay, do not fright us with an angry look.
We are thy sovereign, Clifford; kneel again.
For thy mistaking so, we pardon thee.
This is my king, York; I do not mistake,
But thou mistakes me much to think I do.--
To Bedlam with him! Is the man grown mad?
Ay, Clifford, a bedlam and ambitious humor
Makes him oppose himself against his king.
He is a traitor. Let him to the Tower,
And chop away that factious pate of his.
He is arrested, but will not obey.
His sons, he says, shall give their words for him.
Ay, noble father, if our words will serve.
And if words will not, then our weapons shall.
Why, what a brood of traitors have we here!
Look in a glass, and call thy image so.
Call hither to the stake my two brave bears,
That, with the very shaking of their chains,
They may astonish these fell-lurking curs.
Are these thy bears? We'll bait thy bears to death
And manacle the bearherd in their chains,
If thou dar'st bring them to the baiting place.
Oft have I seen a hot o'erweening cur
Run back and bite because he was withheld,
Who, being suffered with the bear's fell paw,
Hath clapped his tail between his legs and cried;
And such a piece of service will you do
If you oppose yourselves to match Lord Warwick.
Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump,
As crooked in thy manners as thy shape!
Nay, we shall heat you thoroughly anon.
Take heed, lest by your heat you burn yourselves.
Why, Warwick, hath thy knee forgot to bow?--
Old Salisbury, shame to thy silver hair,
Thou mad misleader of thy brainsick son!
What, wilt thou on thy deathbed play the ruffian
And seek for sorrow with thy spectacles?
If it be banished from the frosty head,
Where shall it find a harbor in the earth?
Wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war,
And shame thine honorable age with blood?
Why art thou old and want'st experience?
Or wherefore dost abuse it, if thou hast it?
For shame! In duty bend thy knee to me
That bows unto the grave with mickle age.
My lord, I have considered with myself
The title of this most renowned duke,
And in my conscience do repute his Grace
The rightful heir to England's royal seat.
Hast thou not sworn allegiance unto me?
Canst thou dispense with heaven for such an oath?
It is great sin to swear unto a sin,
But greater sin to keep a sinful oath.
Who can be bound by any solemn vow
To do a murd'rous deed, to rob a man,
To force a spotless virgin's chastity,
To reave the orphan of his patrimony,
To wring the widow from her customed right,
And have no other reason for this wrong
But that he was bound by a solemn oath?
Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.
Call Buckingham and all the friends thou hast,
The first, I warrant thee, if dreams prove true.
You were best to go to bed and dream again,
To keep thee from the tempest of the field.
Than any thou canst conjure up today;
And that I'll write upon thy burgonet,
Might I but know thee by thy house's badge.
Now, by my father's badge, old Neville's crest,
The rampant bear chained to the ragged staff,
This day I'll wear aloft my burgonet--
As on a mountaintop the cedar shows
That keeps his leaves in spite of any storm--
Even to affright thee with the view thereof.
And from thy burgonet I'll rend thy bear
And tread it under foot with all contempt,
Despite the bearherd that protects the bear.
And so to arms, victorious father,
To quell the rebels and their complices.
Fie! Charity, for shame! Speak not in spite,
For you shall sup with Jesu Christ tonight.
Foul stigmatic, that's more than thou canst tell!
If not in heaven, you'll surely sup in hell.
Enter Warwick, wearing the white rose.]
Clifford of Cumberland, 'tis Warwick calls!
An if thou dost not hide thee from the bear,
Now, when the angry trumpet sounds alarum
And dead men's cries do fill the empty air,
Clifford, I say, come forth and fight with me;
Proud northern lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
Warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms.
How now, my noble lord? What, all afoot?
The deadly-handed Clifford slew my steed,
But match to match I have encountered him
And made a prey for carrion kites and crows
Even of the bonny beast he loved so well.
Of one or both of us the time is come.
Hold, Warwick! Seek thee out some other chase,
For I myself must hunt this deer to death.
Then, nobly, York! 'Tis for a crown thou fight'st.--
As I intend, Clifford, to thrive today,
It grieves my soul to leave thee unassailed.
What seest thou in me, York? Why dost thou pause?
With thy brave bearing should I be in love,
But that thou art so fast mine enemy.
Nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem,
But that 'tis shown ignobly and in treason.
So let it help me now against thy sword
As I in justice and true right express it!
My soul and body on the action both!
La fin courrone les oeuvres.	
Thus war hath given thee peace, for thou art still.
Peace with his soul, heaven, if it be thy will!
Shame and confusion! All is on the rout.
Fear frames disorder, and disorder wounds
Where it should guard. O war, thou son of hell,
Whom angry heavens do make their minister,
Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part
Hot coals of vengeance! Let no soldier fly.
He that is truly dedicate to war
Hath no self-love; nor he that loves himself
Hath not essentially, but by circumstance,
The name of valor.  O,
And the premised flames of the last day
Knit Earth and heaven together!
Now let the general trumpet blow his blast,
Particularities and petty sounds
To cease! Wast thou ordained, dear father,
To lose thy youth in peace, and to achieve
The silver livery of advised age,
And, in thy reverence and thy chair-days, thus
To die in ruffian battle? Even at this sight
My heart is turned to stone, and while 'tis mine,
It shall be stony. York not our old men spares;
No more will I their babes. Tears virginal
Shall be to me even as the dew to fire;
And beauty, that the tyrant oft reclaims,
Shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax.
Henceforth I will not have to do with pity.
Meet I an infant of the house of York,
Into as many gobbets will I cut it
As wild Medea young Absyrtis did.
In cruelty will I seek out my fame.
Come, thou new ruin of old Clifford's house;
As did Aeneas old Anchises bear,
So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders.
But then Aeneas bare a living load,
Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine.	
For underneath an alehouse' paltry sign,
The Castle in Saint Albans, Somerset
Hath made the wizard famous in his death.
Sword, hold thy temper! Heart, be wrathful still!
Priests pray for enemies, but princes kill.	
Margaret, both wearing the red rose, and Others.]
Away, my lord! You are slow. For shame, away!
Can we outrun the heavens? Good Margaret, stay!
What are you made of? You'll nor fight nor fly.
Now is it manhood, wisdom, and defense
To give the enemy way, and to secure us
By what we can, which can no more but fly.
If you be ta'en, we then should see the bottom
Of all our fortunes; but if we haply scape,
As well we may--if not through your neglect--
We shall to London get, where you are loved
And where this breach now in our fortunes made
May readily be stopped.
But that my heart's on future mischief set,
But fly you must. Uncurable discomfit
Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.
Away, for your relief! And we will live
To see their day and them our fortune give.
Away, my lord, away!
Warwick, and Soldiers, all wearing the white rose,
Of Salisbury, who can report of him,
That winter lion, who in rage forgets
Aged contusions and all brush of time,
And, like a gallant in the brow of youth,
Repairs him with occasion? This happy day
Is not itself, nor have we won one foot,
If Salisbury be lost.
Three times today I holp him to his horse,
Three times bestrid him. Thrice I led him off,
Persuaded him from any further act;
But still, where danger was, still there I met him,
And, like rich hangings in a homely house,
So was his will in his old feeble body.
But, noble as he is, look where he comes.
Now, by my sword, well hast thou fought today!
By th' Mass, so did we all. I thank you, Richard.
God knows how long it is I have to live,
And it hath pleased Him that three times today
You have defended me from imminent death.
Well, lords, we have not got that which we have;
Being opposites of such repairing nature.
For, as I hear, the King is fled to London
To call a present court of Parliament.
Let us pursue him ere the writs go forth.--
What says Lord Warwick? Shall we after them?
After them? Nay, before them, if we can.
Now, by my hand, lords, 'twas a glorious day.
Saint Albans battle won by famous York
Shall be eternized in all age to come.--
Sound drum and trumpets, and to London all;
And more such days as these to us befall!
Longaville, and Dumaine.]
Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live registered upon our brazen tombs,
And then grace us in the disgrace of death,
When, spite of cormorant devouring time,
Th' endeavor of this present breath may buy
That honor which shall bate his scythe's keen edge
And make us heirs of all eternity.
Therefore, brave conquerors, for so you are
That war against your own affections
And the huge army of the world's desires,
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force.
Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
Our court shall be a little academe,
Still and contemplative in living art.
You three, Berowne, Dumaine, and Longaville,
Have sworn for three years' term to live with me,
My fellow scholars, and to keep those statutes
That are recorded in this schedule here.
Your oaths are passed, and now subscribe your
That his own hand may strike his honor down
That violates the smallest branch herein.
If you are armed to do as sworn to do,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.
The mind shall banquet though the body pine.
Fat paunches have lean pates, and dainty bits
Make rich the ribs but bankrout quite the wits.
My loving lord, Dumaine is mortified.
The grosser manner of these world's delights
He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves.
To love, to wealth, to pomp I pine and die,
With all these living in philosophy.
So much, dear liege, I have already sworn,
That is, to live and study here three years.
But there are other strict observances:
As not to see a woman in that term,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there;
And one day in a week to touch no food,
And but one meal on every day besides,
The which I hope is not enrolled there;
And then to sleep but three hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink of all the day--
When I was wont to think no harm all night,
And make a dark night too of half the day--
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep.
Your oath is passed to pass away from these.
Let me say no, my liege, an if you please.
And stay here in your court for three years' space.
You swore to that, Berowne, and to the rest.
By yea and nay, sir. Then I swore in jest.
What is the end of study, let me know?
Why, that to know which else we should not know.
Things hid and barred, you mean, from common
Ay, that is study's godlike recompense.
Come on, then, I will swear to study so,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus--to study where I well may dine,
Or study where to meet some mistress fine
Or having sworn too hard-a-keeping oath,
Study to break it, and not break my troth.
If study's gain be thus, and this be so,
Study knows that which yet it doth not know.
Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.
These be the stops that hinder study quite,
And train our intellects to vain delight.
Why, all delights are vain, and that most vain
Which with pain purchased doth inherit pain:
As painfully to pore upon a book
Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look.
So, ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes.
Study me how to please the eye indeed
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed
Study is like the heaven's glorious sun,
Small have continual plodders ever won,
These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights,
Have no more profit of their shining nights
Too much to know is to know naught but fame,
And every godfather can give a name.
How well he's read to reason against reading.
Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding.
He weeds the corn, and still lets grow the weeding.
The spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.
How follows that?
In reason nothing.
Berowne is like an envious sneaping frost
Well, say I am. Why should proud summer boast
Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
At Christmas I no more desire a rose
Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled shows,
But like of each thing that in season grows.
So you, to study now it is too late,
Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.
Well, sit you out. Go home, Berowne. Adieu.
No, my good lord, I have sworn to stay with you.
And though I have for barbarism spoke more
Yet, confident, I'll keep what I have sworn
Give me the paper. Let me read the same,
And to the strictest decrees I'll write my name.
How well this yielding rescues thee from shame.
To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
This article, my liege, yourself must break,
The French king's daughter with yourself to speak--
About surrender up of Aquitaine
Therefore this article is made in vain,
What say you, lords? Why, this was quite forgot.
So study evermore is overshot.
While it doth study to have what it would,
It doth forget to do the thing it should.
And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
We must of force dispense with this decree.
She must lie here on mere necessity.
Necessity will make us all forsworn
For every man with his affects is born,
If I break faith, this word shall speak for me:
So to the laws at large I write my name,
Stands in attainder of eternal shame.
But I believe, although I seem so loath,
But is there no quick recreation granted?
Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted
One who the music of his own vain tongue
This child of fancy, that Armado hight,
In high-born words the worth of many a knight
How you delight, my lords, I know not, I,
But I protest I love to hear him lie,
And I will use him for my minstrelsy.
Armado is a most illustrious wight,
Costard the swain and he shall be our sport,
And so to study three years is but short.
Grace's farborough. But I would see his own
There's villainy abroad. This letter will tell you
Jaquenetta. The manner of it is, I was taken with
It is the manner of a man to speak to a woman. For
Dull, a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, and
Thine, in all compliments of devoted and heartburning
Don Adriano de Armado.
My Lord Berowne, see him delivered o'er,
And go we, lords, to put in practice that
Sirrah, come on.
Affliction may one day smile again, and till
Duke.
Samson's love, my dear Mote?
Boy, I do love that country girl that I took in
Maid.
God I have as little patience as another man, and
And how can that be true love which is falsely
His disgrace is to be called "boy," but his glory is to
Assist me, some extemporal god of rhyme, for I am
Ladies , Boyet
Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits.
Consider who the King your father sends,
To whom he sends, and what's his embassy.
Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
To parley with the sole inheritor
Of all perfections that a man may owe,
Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight
Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
As nature was in making graces dear
When she did starve the general world besides
And prodigally gave them all to you.
Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise.
Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye,
Not uttered by base sale of chapmen's tongues.
Than you much willing to be counted wise
In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
You are not ignorant all-telling fame
Doth noise abroad Navarre hath made a vow,
Till painful study shall outwear three years,
No woman may approach his silent court.
Therefore to 's seemeth it a needful course,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
To know his pleasure, and in that behalf,
Bold of your worthiness, we single you
As our best-moving fair solicitor.
Tell him the daughter of the King of France
On serious business craving quick dispatch,
Importunes personal conference with his Grace.
Haste, signify so much, while we attend,
Like humble-visaged suitors, his high will.
Proud of employment, willingly I go.
All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.
Who are the votaries, my loving lords,
That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke?
Lord Longaville is one.
Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir
Of Jaques Falconbridge, solemnized
In Normandy, saw I this Longaville.
Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms.
Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
The only soil of his fair virtue's gloss,
If virtue's gloss will stain with any soil,
Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a will,
Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills
It should none spare that come within his power.
Some merry mocking lord, belike. Is 't so?
They say so most that most his humors know.
Such short-lived wits do wither as they grow.
Who are the rest?
The young Dumaine, a well-accomplished youth,
Of all that virtue love for virtue loved.
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill;
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,
And shape to win grace though he had no wit.
And much too little of that good I saw
Is my report to his great worthiness.
Another of these students at that time
Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
Berowne they call him, but a merrier man,
Within the limit of becoming mirth,
His eye begets occasion for his wit,
For every object that the one doth catch
The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
Which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
Delivers in such apt and gracious words
That aged ears play truant at his tales,
And younger hearings are quite ravished,
So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
God bless my ladies, are they all in love,
That every one her own hath garnished
With such bedecking ornaments of praise?
Here comes Boyet.
Navarre had notice of your fair approach,
And he and his competitors in oath
Were all addressed to meet you, gentle lady,
Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learned:
He rather means to lodge you in the field,
Like one that comes here to besiege his court,
Than seek a dispensation for his oath
To let you enter his unpeopled house.
Berowne.]
Here comes Navarre.
You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
Hear me, dear lady. I have sworn an oath.
Our Lady help my lord! He'll be forsworn.
Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
Why, will shall break it, will and nothing else.
Your Ladyship is ignorant what it is.
Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
And sin to break it.
But pardon me, I am too sudden bold.
To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me in my suit.
Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.
You will the sooner that I were away,
For you'll prove perjured if you make me stay.
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
To ask the question.
Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast; 'twill tire.
Not till it leave the rider in the mire.
What time o' day?
Madam, your father here doth intimate
The payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
Being but the one half of an entire sum
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
But say that he or we, as neither have,
Received that sum, yet there remains unpaid
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
Although not valued to the money's worth.
If then the King your father will restore
But that one half which is unsatisfied,
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendship with his Majesty.
But that, it seems, he little purposeth;
For here he doth demand to have repaid
On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
To have his title live in Aquitaine--
Which we much rather had depart withal,
And have the money by our father lent,
Than Aquitaine, so gelded as it is.
Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
From reason's yielding, your fair self should make
And go well satisfied to France again.
You do the King my father too much wrong,
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In so unseeming to confess receipt
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
And if you prove it, I'll repay it back
Or yield up Aquitaine.
Boyet, you can produce acquittances
For such a sum from special officers
Of Charles his father.
So please your Grace, the packet is not come
Where that and other specialties are bound.
Tomorrow you shall have a sight of them.
It shall suffice me; at which interview
All liberal reason I will yield unto.
Meantime receive such welcome at my hand
As honor  may
Make tender of to thy true worthiness.
You may not come, fair princess, within my gates,
But here without you shall be so received
As you shall deem yourself lodged in my heart,
Though so denied fair harbor in my house.
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell.
Tomorrow shall we visit you again.
Sweet health and fair desires consort your Grace.
Thy own wish wish I thee in every place.
Longaville, and Attendants.]
Sir, I pray you, a word. What lady is that same?
The heir of Alanson, Katherine her name.
Perchance light in the light. I desire her name.
She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a
Falconbridge.
That last is Berowne, the merry madcap lord.
Not a word with him but a jest.
It was well done of you to take him at his word.
Two hot sheeps, marry.
No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
You sheep and I pasture. Shall that finish the jest?
So you grant pasture for me.	
My lips are no common, though several they be.
Belonging to whom?
Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles, agree,
This civil war of wits were much better used
On Navarre and his bookmen, for here 'tis abused.
If my observation, which very seldom lies,
By the heart's still rhetoric, disclosed wi' th' eyes,
Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.
With that which we lovers entitle "affected."
Why, all his behaviors did make their retire
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.
His heart like an agate with your print impressed,
Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed.
His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
All senses to that sense did make their repair,
To feel only looking on fairest of fair.
Methought all his senses were locked in his eye,
As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy,
Who, tend'ring their own worth from where they
Did point you to buy them along as you passed.
His face's own margent did quote such amazes
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.
Come, to our pavilion. Boyet is disposed.
But to speak that in words which his eye hath
By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.
Thou art an old lovemonger and speakest skillfully.
He is Cupid's grandfather, and learns news of him.
Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is
Do you hear, my mad wenches?
Ay, our way to be gone.
Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
Minime, honest master, or rather, master, no.
Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?
He reputes me a cannon, and the bullet, that's
By thy favor, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face.
Most rude melancholy, valor gives thee place.
My herald is returned.
Here's a costard broken in a shin.
Some enigma, some riddle. Come, thy l'envoi begin.
Do the wise think them other? Is not l'envoi a salve?
No, page, it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain
Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.
There's the moral. Now the l'envoi.
Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with
The boy hath sold him a bargain--a goose, that's
Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and
Let me see: a fat l'envoi--ay, that's a fat goose.
Come hither, come hither. How did this argument
By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.
Then called you for the l'envoi.
Jaquenetta.  There is remuneration
My sweet ounce of man's flesh, my incony Jew!
Now will I look to his remuneration. 
Remuneration. Why, it is a fairer name than "French
As thou wilt win my favor, good my knave,
Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.
The Princess comes to hunt here in the park,
And in her train there is a gentle lady.
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her
And Rosaline they call her. Ask for her,
And to her white hand see thou do commend
This sealed-up counsel. There's thy guerdon. 
And I forsooth in love! I that have been love's whip,
Than whom no mortal so magnificent.
This wimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy,
This Signior Junior, giant dwarf, Dan Cupid,
Regent of love rhymes, lord of folded arms,
Th' anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,
Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
Sole imperator and great general
Of trotting paritors--O my little heart!
And I to be a corporal of his field
And wear his colors like a tumbler's hoop!
What? I love, I sue, I seek a wife?
Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
And never going aright, being a watch,
But being watched that it may still go right.
Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all.
And, among three, to love the worst of all,
With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes.
Ay, and by heaven, one that will do the deed
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard.
And I to sigh for her, to watch for her,
To pray for her! Go to. It is a plague
That Cupid will impose for my neglect
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue, groan.
Some men must love my lady, and some Joan.
Was that the King that spurred his horse so hard
Against the steep uprising of the hill?
Whoe'er he was, he showed a mounting mind.--
Well, lords, today we shall have our dispatch.
Or Saturday we will return to France.--
Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
That we must stand and play the murderer in?
Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice,
And thereupon thou speakst "the fairest shoot."
Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.
What, what? First praise me, and again say no?
Yes, madam, fair.
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here, good my glass, take this for telling true.
Fair payment for foul words is more than due.
Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.
See, see, my beauty will be saved by merit.
But come, the bow.  Now
And shooting well is then accounted ill.
Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
Not wounding, pity would not let me do 't;
If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
And out of question so it is sometimes:
Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
When for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
We bend to that the working of the heart;
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
The poor deer's blood, that my heart means no ill.
Do not curst wives hold that self sovereignty
Only for praise' sake when they strive to be
Lords o'er their lords?
Only for praise; and praise we may afford
To any lady that subdues a lord.
Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
The thickest and the tallest: it is so, truth is
An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be
Are not you the chief woman? You are the thickest
Stand aside, good bearer.--Boyet, you can carve.
Break up this capon.
This letter is mistook; it importeth none here.
It is writ to Jaquenetta.
Break the neck of the wax, and everyone give ear.
King. Why did he come? To see. Why did he see? To
The conclusion is victory. On whose side? The
King's. The captive is enriched. On whose side? The
The King's--no, on both in one, or one in both. I am
Shall I entreat thy love? I will. What shalt thou
Me. Thus expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy
Don Adriano de Armado.
What plume of feathers is he that indited this letter?
What vane? What weathercock? Did you ever hear
Else your memory is bad, going o'er it erewhile.
This Armado is a Spaniard that keeps here in court,
To the Prince and his bookmates.
Who gave thee this letter?
To whom shouldst thou give it?
From my Lord Berowne, a good master of mine,
To a lady of France that he called Rosaline.
Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords, away.
Forester exit. Boyet, Rosaline, Maria,
Who is the shooter? Who is the shooter?
Ay, my continent of beauty.
Finely put off.
My lady goes to kill horns, but if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck if horns that year miscarry.
Finely put on.
Well, then, I am the shooter.
If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
Finely put on, indeed.
You still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes at
But she herself is hit lower. Have I hit her now?
By my troth, most pleasant. How both did fit it!
Let the mark have a prick in 't to mete at, if it may
Wide o' the bow hand! I' faith, your hand is out.
Indeed, he must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the
An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.
Come, come, you talk greasily. Your lips grow foul.
She's too hard for you at pricks, sir. Challenge her
By my soul, a swain, a most simple clown.
Lord, Lord, how the ladies and I have put him
When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it
Armado o' th' one side, O, a most dainty man!
To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan.
To see him kiss his hand, and how most sweetly he
And his page o' t' other side, that handful of wit!
Ah heavens, it is a most pathetical nit.
Sola, sola!
Nathaniel the Curate.]
Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred
He hath not eat paper, as it were; he hath not drunk
And such barren plants are set before us that we
Which we of taste and feeling are--for those parts
For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet,
So were there a patch set on learning, to see him in
But omne bene, say I, being of an old father's mind:
Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
You two are bookmen. Can you tell me by your wit
What was a month old at Cain's birth that's not
The moon was a month old when Adam was no
And raught not to five weeks when he came to
Th' allusion holds in the exchange.
The preyful princess pierced and pricked
The dogs did yell. Put "l" to "sore," then sorel
If sore be sore, then "L" to "sore" makes fifty
Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one
Master Person.
Costard, and sent me from Don Armado. I beseech
Ruminat--
Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! Who understandeth
Lege, domine.
Rosaline." I will look again on the intellect of the
Berowne is one of the votaries with the King, and
Trip and go, my sweet. Deliver this paper into the
It kills sheep, it kills me, I a sheep. Well proved
Well, I do nothing in the world but lie, and lie in my
Cupid. Thou hast thumped him with thy birdbolt
How shall she know my griefs? I'll drop the paper.
Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?
What, Longaville, and reading! Listen, ear.
Now, in thy likeness, one more fool appear!
Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers!
In love, I hope! Sweet fellowship in shame.
One drunkard loves another of the name.
Am I the first that have been perjured so?
Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of
The shape of love's Tyburn, that hangs up simplicity.
These numbers will I tear and write in prose.
Disfigure not his shop!
This is the liver vein, which makes flesh a deity,
God amend us, God amend. We are much out o' th'
By whom shall I send this?--Company? Stay.
All hid, all hid--an old infant play.
Like a demigod here sit I in the sky,
And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'ereye.
More sacks to the mill. O heavens, I have my wish.
Dumaine transformed! Four woodcocks in a dish.
By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
By Earth, she is not, corporal. There you lie.
Her amber hairs for foul hath amber quoted.
An amber-colored raven was well noted.
As upright as the cedar.
Her shoulder is with child.
Ay, as some days, but then no sun must shine.
Amen, so I had mine. Is not that a good word?
Reigns in my blood, and will remembered be.
Would let her out in saucers! Sweet misprision.
Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.
Once more I'll mark how love can vary wit.
This will I send, and something else more plain
That shall express my true love's fasting pain.
Were lovers too! Ill to example ill
Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note,
For none offend where all alike do dote.
Dumaine, thy love is far from charity,
That in love's grief desir'st society.
You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
To be o'er-heard and taken napping so.
You chide at him, offending twice as much.
You do not love Maria? Longaville
Did never sonnet for her sake compile,
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
His loving bosom to keep down his heart?
And marked you both, and for you both did blush.
Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion.
One, her hairs were gold, crystal the other's eyes.
What will Berowne say when that he shall hear
Faith infringed, which such zeal did swear?
How will he scorn, how will he spend his wit!
How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it!
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy.
Ah, good my liege, I pray thee pardon me.
Good heart, what grace hast thou thus to reprove
These worms for loving, that art most in love?
Your eyes do make no coaches; in your tears
There is no certain princess that appears.
You'll not be perjured, 'tis a hateful thing!
Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting!
But are you not ashamed? Nay, are you not,
All three of you, to be thus much o'ershot?
But I a beam do find in each of three.
Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow, and of teen!
To see a king transformed to a gnat!
To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
And profound Solomon to tune a jig,
And Nestor play at pushpin with the boys,
And critic Timon laugh at idle toys.
Where lies thy grief, O tell me, good Dumaine?
And gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
And where my liege's? All about the breast!
Are we betrayed thus to thy overview?
Not you to me, but I betrayed by you.
To break the vow I am engaged in.
With men like you, men of inconstancy.
When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
Or groan for Joan? or spend a minute's time
In pruning me? When shall you hear that I
Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
God bless the King.
Some certain treason.
Nay, it makes nothing, sir.
The treason and you go in peace away together.
Our person misdoubts it. 'Twas treason, he said.
Berowne, read it over.
How now, what is in you? Why dost thou tear it?
It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear
It is Berowne's writing, and here is his name.
Ah, you whoreson loggerhead, you were born to do
Guilty, my lord, guilty. I confess, I confess.
That you three fools lacked me fool to make up
He, he, and you--and you, my liege--and I
Are pickpurses in love, and we deserve to die.
Now the number is even.
Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace.
The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
We cannot cross the cause why we were born;
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly
Rosaline
That, like a rude and savage man of Ind
Bows not his vassal head and, strucken blind,
What peremptory eagle-sighted eye
That is not blinded by her majesty?
My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon,
My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne.
Of all complexions the culled sovereignty
Where several worthies make one dignity,
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues--
To things of sale a seller's praise belongs.
Beauty doth varnish age, as if newborn,
Is ebony like her? O word divine!
If that she learn not of her eye to look?
And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.
Should ravish doters with a false aspect:
Her favor turns the fashion of the days,
And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise,
To look like her are chimney-sweepers black.
And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.
Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
But what of this? Are we not all in love?
Then leave this chat, and, good Berowne, now prove
Ay, marry, there, some flattery for this evil.
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.
Have at you, then, affection's men-at-arms!
And in that vow we have forsworn our books.
For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,
In leaden contemplation have found out
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
Of beauty's tutors have enriched you with?
Other slow arts entirely keep the brain
And therefore, finding barren practicers,
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil.
But love, first learned in a lady's eyes,
Lives not alone immured in the brain,
But with the motion of all elements
Courses as swift as thought in every power,
And gives to every power a double power,
Above their functions and their offices.
It adds a precious seeing to the eye.
When the suspicious head of theft is stopped.
Love's feeling is more soft and sensible
Than are the tender horns of cockled snails.
Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste.
For valor, is not love a Hercules,
Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
Subtle as Sphinx, as sweet and musical
As bright Apollo's lute strung with his hair.
And when love speaks, the voice of all the gods
Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.
Never durst poet touch a pen to write
Until his ink were tempered with love's sighs.
And plant in tyrants mild humility.
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive.
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire.
They are the books, the arts, the academes
That show, contain, and nourish all the world.
Else none at all in ought proves excellent.
Then fools you were these women to forswear,
Or, keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.
For wisdom's sake, a word that all men love,
Or for love's sake, a word that loves all men,
Or for men's sake, the authors of these women,
Or women's sake, by whom we men are men,
Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves,
Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths.
It is religion to be thus forsworn,
For charity itself fulfills the law,
And who can sever love from charity?
Saint Cupid, then, and, soldiers, to the field!
Advance your standards, and upon them, lords.
Pell-mell, down with them. But be first advised
In conflict that you get the sun of them.
Now to plain dealing. Lay these glozes by.
Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?
And win them, too. Therefore let us devise
Some entertainment for them in their tents.
First, from the park let us conduct them thither.
Then homeward every man attach the hand
Of his fair mistress. In the afternoon
We will with some strange pastime solace them,
Such as the shortness of the time can shape;
For revels, dances, masques, and merry hours
Forerun fair love, strewing her way with flowers.
Away, away! No time shall be omitted
That will betime and may by us be fitted.
Allons! Allons! Sowed cockle reaped no corn,
Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;
Armado.
Grace, by the world, sometimes to lean upon my
Greatness to impart to Armado, a soldier, a man of
The very all of all is--but sweetheart, I do implore
Princess, sweet chuck, with some delightful ostentation,
Now, understanding that the curate and your sweet
Worthies.--Sir Nathaniel, as concerning some
King's command, and this most gallant, illustrate,
Hercules in minority. His enter and exit shall be
Away.
Katherine, and Maria.)]
Sweethearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in.
Look you what I have from the loving king.
Madam, came nothing else along with that?
Nothing but this? Yes, as much love in rhyme
As would be crammed up in a sheet of paper
Writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.
That was the way to make his godhead wax,
For he hath been five thousand year a boy.
Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows, too.
You'll ne'er be friends with him. He killed your
He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy,
And so she died. Had she been light like you,
Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit,
She might ha' been a grandam ere she died.
And so may you, for a light heart lives long.
What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light
We need more light to find your meaning out.
You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
Look what you do, you do it still i' th' dark.
So do not you, for you are a light wench.
Indeed, I weigh not you, and therefore light.
You weigh me not? O, that's you care not for me.
Great reason: for past care is still past cure.
Well bandied both; a set of wit well played.
But, Rosaline, you have a favor too.
Who sent it? And what is it?
An if my face were but as fair as yours,
My favor were as great. Be witness this.
Nay, I have verses too, I thank Berowne;
The numbers true; and were the numb'ring too,
Much in the letters, nothing in the praise.
Beauteous as ink: a good conclusion.
Fair as a text B in a copybook.
Ware pencils, ho! Let me not die your debtor,
My red dominical, my golden letter.
But, Katherine, what was sent to you
From fair Dumaine?
Madam, this glove.	
Some thousand verses of a faithful lover,
Vilely compiled, profound simplicity.
This, and these pearls, to me sent Longaville.
The letter is too long by half a mile.
The chain were longer and the letter short?
Ay, or I would these hands might never part.
We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.
They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
That same Berowne I'll torture ere I go.
How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
And wait the season, and observe the times,
And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes,
And shape his service wholly to my hests,
And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
So pair-taunt-like would I o'ersway his state,
That he should be my fool, and I his fate.
None are so surely caught, when they are catched,
As wit turned fool. Folly in wisdom hatched
Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school,
And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
The blood of youth burns not with such excess
As gravity's revolt to wantonness.
Folly in fools bears not so strong a note
As fool'ry in the wise, when wit doth dote,
Since all the power thereof it doth apply
To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.
Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.
Thy news, Boyet?
Arm, wenches, arm. Encounters mounted are
Against your peace. Love doth approach, disguised,
Armed in arguments. You'll be surprised.
Muster your wits, stand in your own defense,
Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.
Saint Denis to Saint Cupid! What are they
That charge their breath against us? Say, scout, say.
Under the cool shade of a sycamore,
When, lo, to interrupt my purposed rest,
Toward that shade I might behold addressed
The King and his companions. Warily
And overheard what you shall overhear:
That, by and by, disguised, they will be here.
Their herald is a pretty knavish page
That well by heart hath conned his embassage.
Action and accent did they teach him there:
And ever and anon they made a doubt
Presence majestical would put him out;
Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously."
The boy replied "An angel is not evil.
With that, all laughed and clapped him on the
Making the bold wag by their praises bolder.
One rubbed his elbow thus, and fleered, and swore
Another with his finger and his thumb,
Cried "Via! We will do 't, come what will come."
The third he capered and cried "All goes well!"
The fourth turned on the toe, and down he fell.
With that, they all did tumble on the ground
With such a zealous laughter so profound
That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
To check their folly, passion's solemn tears.
But what, but what? Come they to visit us?
They do, they do; and are appareled thus,
Like Muscovites, or Russians, as I guess.
Their purpose is to parley, to court, and dance,
And every one his love-feat will advance
Unto his several mistress--which they'll know
By favors several which they did bestow.
And will they so? The gallants shall be tasked,
For, ladies, we will every one be masked,
And not a man of them shall have the grace,
Despite of suit, to see a lady's face.
Hold, Rosaline, this favor thou shalt wear,
And then the King will court thee for his dear.
Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine.
So shall Berowne take me for Rosaline.
And change you favors too. So shall your loves
Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.
Come on, then, wear the favors most in sight.
But in this changing, what is your intent?
The effect of my intent is to cross theirs.
They do it but in mockery merriment,
And mock for mock is only my intent.
Their several counsels they unbosom shall
To loves mistook, and so be mocked withal
Upon the next occasion that we meet,
With visages displayed, to talk and greet.
But shall we dance, if they desire us to 't?
No, to the death we will not move a foot,
Nor to their penned speech render we no grace,
But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face.
Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
And quite divorce his memory from his part.
Therefore I do it, and I make no doubt
The rest will ne'er come in if he be out.
There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
To make theirs ours and ours none but our own.
So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
And they, well mocked, depart away with shame.
The trumpet sounds. Be masked; the maskers come.
All hail, the richest beauties on the Earth!
Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
That ever turned their--backs--to mortal views.
That ever turned their eyes to mortal views.
Out--
Out of your favors, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
Not to behold--
Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes--
With your sun-beamed eyes--
They will not answer to that epithet.
You were best call it "daughter-beamed eyes."
They do not mark me, and that brings me out.
Is this your perfectness? Begone, you rogue!
What would these strangers? Know their minds,
Boyet.
If they do speak our language, 'tis our will
That some plain man recount their purposes.
Know what they would.
Princess?
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
Why, that they have, and bid them so be gone.
She says you have it, and you may be gone.
Say to her we have measured many miles
To tread a measure with her on this grass.
They say that they have measured many a mile
To tread a measure with you on this grass.
It is not so. Ask them how many inches
Is in one mile. If they have measured many,
The measure then of one is eas'ly told.
If to come hither you have measured miles,
And many miles, the Princess bids you tell
How many inches doth fill up one mile.
Tell her we measure them by weary steps.
She hears herself.
Of many weary miles you have o'ergone
Are numbered in the travel of one mile?
We number nothing that we spend for you.
Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
That we may do it still without account.
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face
That we, like savages, may worship it.
My face is but a moon, and clouded too.
Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do!
Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to
Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.
Thou now requests but moonshine in the water.
Then in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
Thou bidd'st me beg; this begging is not strange.
Play music, then. Nay, you must do it soon.
Not yet? No dance! Thus change I like the moon.
Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?
You took the moon at full, but now she's changed.
Yet still she is the moon, and I the man.
The music plays. Vouchsafe some motion to it.
Our ears vouchsafe it.
Since you are strangers and come here by chance,
We'll not be nice. Take hands. We will not dance.
Why take we hands then?
Curtsy, sweethearts--and so the measure ends.
More measure of this measure! Be not nice.
We can afford no more at such a price.
Prize you yourselves. What buys your company?
Your absence only.
Then cannot we be bought. And so adieu--
Twice to your visor, and half once to you.
If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.
In private, then.
White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.
Honey, and milk, and sugar--there is three.
Nay then, two treys, an if you grow so nice,
Metheglin, wort, and malmsey. Well run, dice!
There's half a dozen sweets.
Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.
One word in secret.
Thou grievest my gall.
Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
Name it.
Take that for your "fair lady."
As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.
What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
You have a double tongue within your mask,
And would afford my speechless vizard half.
Veal, quoth the Dutchman. Is not veal a calf?
Let's part the word.
Take all and wean it. It may prove an ox.
Look how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks.
Will you give horns, chaste lady? Do not so.
Then die a calf before your horns do grow.
One word in private with you ere I die.
Bleat softly, then. The butcher hears you cry.
The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen;
Seemeth their conference. Their conceits have
Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter
Not one word more, my maids. Break off, break off!
By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
Farewell, mad wenches. You have simple wits.
Twenty adieus, my frozen Muskovits.--
Are these the breed of wits so wondered at?
Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.
Will they not, think you, hang themselves tonight?
This pert Berowne was out of count'nance quite.
The King was weeping ripe for a good word.
Dumaine was at my service, and his sword.
Lord Longaville said I came o'er his heart.
Yes, in good faith.
But will you hear? The King is my love sworn.
And Longaville was for my service born.
Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear.
Immediately they will again be here
In their own shapes, for it can never be
They will digest this harsh indignity.
Will they return?
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows.
Therefore change favors, and when they repair,
Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
How "blow"? How "blow"? Speak to be understood.
Fair ladies masked are roses in their bud.
Dismasked, their damask sweet commixture shown,
Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.
Avaunt, perplexity!--What shall we do
If they return in their own shapes to woo?
Good madam, if by me you'll be advised,
Let's mock them still, as well known as disguised.
Let us complain to them what fools were here,
Disguised like Muscovites in shapeless gear,
And wonder what they were, and to what end
Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penned,
And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
Should be presented at our tent to us.
Ladies, withdraw. The gallants are at hand.
Whip to our tents, as roes runs o'er land.
Fair sir, God save you. Where's the Princess?
Gone to her tent. Please it your Majesty
Command me any service to her thither?
That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons peas,
And utters it again when God doth please.
He is wit's peddler, and retails his wares
At wakes and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs.
And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve.
Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve.
He can carve too, and lisp. Why, this is he
That kissed his hand away in courtesy.
This is the ape of form, Monsieur the Nice,
That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice
In honorable terms. Nay, he can sing
Mend him who can. The ladies call him sweet.
The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet.
This is the flower that smiles on everyone
To show his teeth as white as whale's bone;
And consciences that will not die in debt
Pay him the due of "honey-tongued Boyet."
That put Armado's page out of his part!
See where it comes! Behavior, what wert thou
Till this madman showed thee? And what art thou
All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day.
Construe my speeches better, if you may.
We came to visit you, and purpose now
This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow.
Rebuke me not for that which you provoke.
You nickname virtue; "vice" you should have spoke,
Now by my maiden honor, yet as pure
So much I hate a breaking cause to be
Of heavenly oaths vowed with integrity.
Not so, my lord. It is not so, I swear.
Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
My lady, to the manner of the days,
In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
We four indeed confronted were with four
In Russian habit. Here they stayed an hour
And talked apace; and in that hour, my lord,
They did not bless us with one happy word.
When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
This jest is dry to me. Gentle sweet,
Your wits makes wise things foolish. When we greet,
With eyes' best seeing, heaven's fiery eye,
By light we lose light. Your capacity
Is of that nature that to your huge store
Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.
This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye--
But that you take what doth to you belong,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
All the fool mine?
Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
Where? When? What vizard? Why demand you this?
There; then; that vizard; that superfluous case
That hid the worse and showed the better face.
We were descried. They'll mock us now downright.
Let us confess and turn it to a jest.
Amazed, my lord? Why looks your Highness sad?
Help, hold his brows! He'll swoon!--Why look you
Seasick, I think, coming from Muscovy.
Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
Here stand I, lady. Dart thy skill at me.
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance.
And I will wish thee nevermore to dance,
Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
Figures pedantical--these summer flies
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be expressed
And to begin: Wench, so God help me, law,
My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
Sans "sans," I pray you.
Of the old rage. Bear with me, I am sick;
Write "Lord have mercy on us" on those three.
They are infected; in their hearts it lies.
They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes.
These lords are visited. You are not free,
For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.
No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.
Our states are forfeit. Seek not to undo us.
It is not so, for how can this be true,
That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?
Peace, for I will not have to do with you.
Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
Speak for yourselves. My wit is at an end.
Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
Some fair excuse.
Were not you here but even now, disguised?
Madam, I was.
What did you whisper in your lady's ear?
That more than all the world I did respect her.
When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.
Upon mine honor, no.
Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
Despise me when I break this oath of mine.
What did the Russian whisper in your ear?
Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
As precious eyesight, and did value me
Above this world, adding thereto moreover
That he would wed me or else die my lover.
God give thee joy of him! The noble lord
Most honorably doth uphold his word.
What mean you, madam? By my life, my troth,
By heaven, you did! And to confirm it plain,
You gave me this.  But take it,
My faith and this the Princess I did give.
Pardon me, sir. This jewel did she wear.
And Lord Berowne, I thank him, is my dear.
Neither of either. I remit both twain.
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
To dash it like a Christmas comedy.
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight
Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some
Dick,
That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
To make my lady laugh when she's disposed,
Told our intents before; which once disclosed,
The ladies did change favors; and then we,
Following the signs, wooed but the sign of she.
Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
We are again forsworn in will and error.
Much upon this 'tis.  And might not you
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
Do not you know my lady's foot by th' squier?
And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
You put our page out. Go, you are allowed.
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
You leer upon me, do you? There's an eye
Wounds like a leaden sword.
Hath this brave manage, this career been run.
Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace, I have done.
Welcome, pure wit. Thou part'st a fair fray.
Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no.
What, are there but three?
For every one pursents three.
Not so, sir, under correction, sir, I hope it is not so.
You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir; we
By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
We will turn it finely off, sir. We will take some
Berowne, they will shame us. Let them not
We are shame-proof, my lord; and 'tis some policy
To have one show worse than the King's and his
Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now.
That sport best pleases that doth least know how,
Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
Dies in the zeal of that which it presents.
Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
When great things laboring perish in their birth.
Armado gives King a paper.]
He speaks not like a man of God his making.
Alexander, Armado's page Hercules, the pedant
Judas Maccabaeus.
And if these four Worthies in their first show thrive,
These four will change habits and present the other
Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
Cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.
The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.
Well said, old mocker. I must needs be friends with
It is "Great," sir.--Pompey, surnamed the
Great,
That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my
And traveling along this coast, I here am come by
And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of
France.
If your Ladyship would say "Thanks, Pompey," I
When in the world I lived, I was the world's
By east, west, north, and south, I spread my
My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander--
Your nose says no, you are not, for it stands too
Your nose smells "no" in this, most tender-smelling
The conqueror is dismayed.--Proceed, good
Alexander.
When in the world I lived, I was the world's
Most true; 'tis right. You were so, Alisander.
Alisander.
Alisander the Conqueror. You will be scraped out of
He will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror, and
There, an 't shall please you, a foolish mild man, an
Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
Quoniam he seemeth in minority,
Ergo I come with this apology.
Judas I am--
Judas I am, yclept Maccabaeus.
Judas?
Judas I am--
And now forward, for we have put thee in
An thou wert a lion, we would do so.
Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.--
And so adieu, sweet Jude. Nay, why dost thou stay?
For the "ass" to the "Jude"? Give it him.--Jud-as,
This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!
The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
Speak, brave Hector. We are much delighted.
This Hector far surmounted Hannibal.
The party is gone--
Thou shalt die!
Pompey. Pompey the Huge!
Stir them on, stir them on.
But that thou interruptest our merriment.
Is heavy in my tongue. The King your father--
Dead, for my life.
Worthies, away! The scene begins to cloud.
Boyet, prepare. I will away tonight.
Madam, not so. I do beseech you stay.
Prepare, I say.--I thank you, gracious lords,
For all your fair endeavors, and entreat,
Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
If overboldly we have borne ourselves
In the converse of breath; your gentleness
Was guilty of it. Farewell, worthy lord.
Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
For my great suit so easily obtained.
The extreme parts of time extremely forms
All causes to the purpose of his speed,
And often at his very loose decides
That which long process could not arbitrate.
And though the mourning brow of progeny
Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
The holy suit which fain it would convince,
Yet since love's argument was first on foot,
Let not the cloud of sorrow jostle it
From what it purposed, since to wail friends lost
Is not by much so wholesome-profitable
As to rejoice at friends but newly found.
Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief,
And by these badges understand the King:
For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
Played foul play with our oaths. Your beauty, ladies,
Hath much deformed us, fashioning our humors
Even to the opposed end of our intents.
And what in us hath seemed ridiculous--
As love is full of unbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain,
Formed by the eye and therefore, like the eye,
Full of strange shapes, of habits, and of forms,
Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
To every varied object in his glance;
Which parti-coated presence of loose love
Put on by us, if, in your heavenly eyes,
Have misbecomed our oaths and gravities,
Those heavenly eyes, that look into these faults,
Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies,
Our love being yours, the error that love makes
Is likewise yours. We to ourselves prove false
By being once false forever to be true
To those that make us both--fair ladies, you.
And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
We have received your letters full of love;
Your favors, the ambassadors of love;
And in our maiden council rated them
At courtship, pleasant jest, and courtesy,
As bombast and as lining to the time.
But more devout than this in our respects
Have we not been, and therefore met your loves
In their own fashion, like a merriment.
Our letters, madam, showed much more than jest.
So did our looks.
Now, at the latest minute of the hour,
Grant us your loves.
To make a world-without-end bargain in.
No, no, my lord, your Grace is perjured much,
Full of dear guiltiness, and therefore this:
If for my love--as there is no such cause--
You will do aught, this shall you do for me:
Your oath I will not trust, but go with speed
To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
Remote from all the pleasures of the world.
There stay until the twelve celestial signs
Have brought about the annual reckoning.
If this austere insociable life
Change not your offer made in heat of blood;
If frosts and fasts, hard lodging, and thin weeds
Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
But that it bear this trial, and last love;
Then, at the expiration of the year,
Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts,
And by this virgin palm now kissing thine,
My woeful self up in a mourning house,
Raining the tears of lamentation
For the remembrance of my father's death.
If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
Neither entitled in the other's heart.
If this, or more than this, I would deny,
The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
But what to me, my love? But what to me?
With threefold love I wish you all these three.
Not so, my lord. A twelvemonth and a day
Come when the King doth to my lady come;
Then, if I have much love, I'll give you some.
Yet swear not, lest you be forsworn again.
What says Maria?
The liker you; few taller are so young.
Studies my lady? Mistress, look on me.
Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,
What humble suit attends thy answer there.
Impose some service on me for thy love.
Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Berowne,
Before I saw you; and the world's large tongue
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
Which you on all estates will execute
That lie within the mercy of your wit.
To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain,
And therewithal to win me, if you please,
Without the which I am not to be won,
You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
Visit the speechless sick, and still converse
With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,
With all the fierce endeavor of your wit,
To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
It cannot be, it is impossible.
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.
Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools.
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
Of him that makes it. Then if sickly ears,
Deafed with the clamors of their own dear groans
Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
And I will have you and that fault withal.
But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
And I shall find you empty of that fault,
Right joyful of your reformation.
Ay, sweet my lord, and so I take my leave.
No, madam, we will bring you on your way.
Our wooing doth not end like an old play.
Jack hath not Jill. These ladies' courtesy
Might well have made our sport a comedy.
Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth and a day,
And then 'twill end.
Was not that Hector?
This side is Hiems, Winter; this Ver, the Spring; the
Ver, begin.
The Song.
To sing a song that old was sung,
From ashes ancient Gower is come,
Assuming man's infirmities
To glad your ear and please your eyes.
It hath been sung at festivals,
On ember eves and holy days,
And lords and ladies in their lives
Have read it for restoratives.
The purchase is to make men glorious,
Et bonum quo antiquius, eo melius.
If you, born in these latter times
When wit's more ripe, accept my rhymes,
And that to hear an old man sing
May to your wishes pleasure bring,
Waste it for you like taper light.
This Antioch, then: Antiochus the Great
Built up this city for his chiefest seat,
The fairest in all Syria.
This king unto him took a peer,
Who died and left a female heir
So buxom, blithe, and full of face
As heaven had lent her all his grace;
With whom the father liking took
And her to incest did provoke.
Bad child, worse father! To entice his own
To evil should be done by none.
But custom what they did begin
Was with long use accounted no sin.
The beauty of this sinful dame
Made many princes thither frame
To seek her as a bedfellow,
In marriage pleasures playfellow;
Which to prevent he made a law
To keep her still, and men in awe,
That whoso asked her for his wife,
His riddle told not, lost his life.
So for her many a wight did die,
As yon grim looks do testify.
What now ensues, to the judgment of your eye
Young Prince of Tyre, you have at large received
The danger of the task you undertake.
Emboldened with the glory of her praise
Think death no hazard in this enterprise.
Music!	
Bring in our daughter, clothed like a bride
For embracements even of Jove himself,
At whose conception, till Lucina reigned,
Nature this dowry gave: to glad her presence,
The senate house of planets all did sit
To knit in her their best perfections.
See where she comes, appareled like the spring,
Graces her subjects, and her thoughts the king
Of every virtue gives renown to men!
Her face the book of praises, where is read
Nothing but curious pleasures, as from thence
Sorrow were ever razed, and testy wrath
Could never be her mild companion.
You gods that made me man, and sway in love,
That have inflamed desire in my breast
To taste the fruit of yon celestial tree
Or die in th' adventure, be my helps,
As I am son and servant to your will,
To compass such a boundless happiness.
Prince Pericles--
That would be son to great Antiochus.
Before thee stands this fair Hesperides,
With golden fruit, but dangerous to be touched;
For deathlike dragons here affright thee hard.
Her face, like heaven, enticeth thee to view
Her countless glory, which desert must gain;
And which without desert, because thine eye
Presumes to reach, all the whole heap must die.
Yon sometimes famous princes, like thyself,
Drawn by report, advent'rous by desire,
Tell thee with speechless tongues and semblance pale
That, without covering save yon field of stars,
Here they stand martyrs slain in Cupid's wars,
And with dead cheeks advise thee to desist
For going on death's net, whom none resist.
Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught
My frail mortality to know itself,
And by those fearful objects to prepare
This body, like to them, to what I must.
For death remembered should be like a mirror
Who tells us life's but breath, to trust it error.
Who know the world, see heaven but, feeling woe,
Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did;
So I bequeath a happy peace to you
And all good men, as every prince should do;
My riches to the earth from whence they came,
Thus ready for the way of life or death,
Scorning advice, read the conclusion, then:
Which read and not expounded, 'tis decreed,
As these before thee, thou thyself shalt bleed.
Of all 'sayed yet, mayst thou prove prosperous;
Of all 'sayed yet, I wish thee happiness.
Like a bold champion I assume the lists,
Nor ask advice of any other thought
But faithfulness and courage.
That gives heaven countless eyes to view men's acts,
Why cloud they not their sights perpetually
If this be true which makes me pale to read it?
Fair glass of light, I loved you, and could still
Were not this glorious casket stored with ill.
But I must tell you now my thoughts revolt;
For he's no man on whom perfections wait
That, knowing sin within, will touch the gate.
You are a fair viol, and your sense the strings
Who, fingered to make man his lawful music,
Would draw heaven down and all the gods to
But, being played upon before your time,
Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime.
Good sooth, I care not for you.
Prince Pericles, touch not, upon thy life,
For that's an article within our law
As dangerous as the rest. Your time's expired.
Either expound now or receive your sentence.
Few love to hear the sins they love to act.
Who has a book of all that monarchs do,
He's more secure to keep it shut than shown.
For vice repeated is like the wand'ring wind,
Blows dust in others' eyes to spread itself;
And yet the end of all is bought thus dear:
The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear
To stop the air would hurt them. The blind mole casts
Copped hills towards heaven, to tell the Earth is
By man's oppression, and the poor worm doth die
Kings are Earth's gods; in vice their law's their will;
And if Jove stray, who dares say Jove doth ill?
It is enough you know; and it is fit,
What being more known grows worse, to smother it.
All love the womb that their first being bred;
Then give my tongue like leave to love my head.
Heaven, that I had thy head! He has found the
But I will gloze with him.--Young Prince of Tyre,
Though by the tenor of our strict edict,
Your exposition misinterpreting,
We might proceed to cancel of your days,
Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree
As your fair self, doth tune us otherwise.
Forty days longer we do respite you,
If by which time our secret be undone,
This mercy shows we'll joy in such a son.
And until then, your entertain shall be
As doth befit our honor and your worth.
How courtesy would seem to cover sin
When what is done is like an hypocrite,
The which is good in nothing but in sight.
If it be true that I interpret false,
Then were it certain you were not so bad
As with foul incest to abuse your soul;
Where now you're both a father and a son
By your untimely claspings with your child,
Which pleasures fits a husband, not a father,
And she an eater of her mother's flesh
By the defiling of her parents' bed;
And both like serpents are, who, though they feed
On sweetest flowers, yet they poison breed.
Antioch, farewell, for wisdom sees those men
Blush not in actions blacker than the night
Will 'schew no course to keep them from the light.
One sin, I know, another doth provoke;
Murder's as near to lust as flame to smoke.
Poison and treason are the hands of sin,
Ay, and the targets to put off the shame.
Then, lest my life be cropped to keep you clear,
By flight I'll shun the danger which I fear.	
For which we mean to have his head.
He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy,
Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin
In such a loathed manner.
And therefore instantly this prince must die,
For by his fall my honor must keep high.--
Who attends us there?
Thaliard, you are of our chamber, Thaliard,
And our mind partakes her private actions
To your secrecy; and for your faithfulness
We will advance you, Thaliard. Behold,
Here's poison, and here's gold. 
Of Tyre, and thou must kill him. It fits thee not
To ask the reason why: because we bid it.
Say, is it done?
Let your breath cool yourself, telling your haste.
Thaliard, adieu. Till Pericles be dead,
My heart can lend no succor to my head.
Let none disturb us.  Why should
The sad companion dull-eyed Melancholy,
Be my so used a guest as not an hour
In the day's glorious walk or peaceful night,
The tomb where grief should sleep, can breed me
Here pleasures court mine eyes, and mine eyes shun
And danger, which I feared, is at Antioch,
Whose arm seems far too short to hit me here.
Yet neither pleasure's art can joy my spirits,
Nor yet the other's distance comfort me.
Then it is thus: the passions of the mind
That have their first conception by misdread
Have after-nourishment and life by care;
And what was first but fear what might be done
Grows elder now, and cares it be not done.
And so with me. The great Antiochus,
Since he's so great can make his will his act,
Will think me speaking though I swear to silence;
Nor boots it me to say I honor him
If he suspect I may dishonor him.
And what may make him blush in being known,
He'll stop the course by which it might be known.
With hostile forces he'll o'er-spread the land,
And with th' ostent of war will look so huge
Amazement shall drive courage from the state,
Our men be vanquished ere they do resist,
And subjects punished that ne'er thought offense;
Which care of them, not pity of myself,
Who am no more but as the tops of trees
Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them,
Makes both my body pine and soul to languish
And punish that before that he would punish.
Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast.
And keep your mind till you return to us
Peaceful and comfortable.
Peace, peace, and give experience tongue.
They do abuse the King that flatter him,
For flattery is the bellows blows up sin;
The thing the which is flattered, but a spark
To which that wind gives heat and stronger glowing;
Whereas reproof, obedient and in order,
Fits kings as they are men, for they may err.
When Signior Sooth here does proclaim peace,
He flatters you, makes war upon your life.
Prince, pardon me, or strike me, if you please.
All leave us else; but let your cares o'erlook
What shipping and what lading's in our haven,
And then return to us.	
Helicanus,
Thou hast moved us. What seest thou in our looks?
If there be such a dart in princes' frowns,
How durst thy tongue move anger to our face?
How dares the plants look up to heaven,
From whence they have their nourishment?
Thou knowest I have power to take thy life from thee.
Do but you strike the blow.
Rise, prithee rise.	
Sit down. Thou art no flatterer.
That kings should let their ears hear their faults hid.
Fit counselor and servant for a prince,
Who by thy wisdom makes a prince thy servant,
What wouldst thou have me do?
As you yourself do lay upon yourself.
Thou speak'st like a physician, Helicanus,
That ministers a potion unto me
That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself.
Attend me, then: I went to Antioch,
Where, as thou know'st, against the face of death
From whence an issue I might propagate,
Are arms to princes and bring joys to subjects.
Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder,
The rest--hark in thine ear--as black as incest,
Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father
Seemed not to strike, but smooth. But thou know'st
Which fear so grew in me I hither fled
Under the covering of a careful night,
Who seemed my good protector; and, being here,
Bethought me what was past, what might succeed.
Decrease not but grow faster than the years;
And should he doubt, as no doubt he doth,
That I should open to the list'ning air
How many worthy princes' bloods were shed
To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope,
To lop that doubt he'll fill this land with arms,
And make pretense of wrong that I have done him;
When all, for mine--if I may call 't--offense,
Must feel war's blow, who spares not innocence;
Which love to all--of which thyself art one,
Who now reproved'st me for 't--
Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood from my cheeks,
Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts
How I might stop this tempest ere it came;
And finding little comfort to relieve them,
Well, my lord, since you have given me leave to speak,
Freely will I speak. Antiochus you fear,
And justly too, I think, you fear the tyrant,
Who either by public war or private treason
Will take away your life.
Therefore, my lord, go travel for a while,
Till that his rage and anger be forgot,
Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life.
Your rule direct to any. If to me,
Day serves not light more faithful than I'll be.
But should he wrong my liberties in my absence?
We'll mingle our bloods together in the earth,
From whence we had our being and our birth.
Tyre, I now look from thee, then, and to Tarsus
Intend my travel, where I'll hear from thee,
And by whose letters I'll dispose myself.
The care I had and have of subjects' good
On thee I lay, whose wisdom's strength can bear it.
Who shuns not to break one will crack both.
But in our orbs we'll live so round and safe
That time of both this truth shall ne'er convince.
Thou showed'st a subject's shine, I a true prince.
Now do I see he had some reason for 't, for if a
You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre,
Further to question me of your king's departure.
His sealed commission left in trust with me
Does speak sufficiently he's gone to travel.
If further yet you will be satisfied
Why, as it were, unlicensed of your loves
He would depart, I'll give some light unto you.
Being at Antioch--
Royal Antiochus, on what cause I know not,
Took some displeasure at him--at least he judged so;
And doubting lest he had erred or sinned,
To show his sorrow, he'd correct himself;
So puts himself unto the shipman's toil,
With whom each minute threatens life or death.
King's ears it must please. He 'scaped the land to
Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.
Pericles, but since my landing I have understood
Now message must return from whence it came.
Commended to our master, not to us.
Yet ere you shall depart, this we desire:
As friends to Antioch, we may feast in Tyre.
Dionyza and others.]
My Dionyza, shall we rest us here
And, by relating tales of others' griefs,
See if 'twill teach us to forget our own?
That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it;
For who digs hills because they do aspire
Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher.
Here they are but felt, and seen with mischief's eyes,
But like to groves, being topped, they higher rise.
Who wanteth food, and will not say he wants it,
Or can conceal his hunger till he famish?
Our tongues and sorrows do sound deep our woes
Into the air, our eyes do weep till lungs
Fetch breath that may proclaim them louder, that
If heaven slumber while their creatures want,
They may awake their helpers to comfort them.
And, wanting breath to speak, help me with tears.
This Tarsus, o'er which I have the government,
For Riches strewed herself even in her streets;
Whose towers bore heads so high they kissed the
And strangers ne'er beheld but wondered at;
Whose men and dames so jetted and adorned,
Like one another's glass to trim them by;
Their tables were stored full to glad the sight,
And not so much to feed on as delight;
All poverty was scorned, and pride so great,
The name of help grew odious to repeat.
But see what heaven can do by this our change:
These mouths who but of late earth, sea, and air
Were all too little to content and please,
Although they gave their creatures in abundance,
As houses are defiled for want of use,
They are now starved for want of exercise.
Those palates who not yet two savors younger
Must have inventions to delight the taste,
Would now be glad of bread and beg for it.
Those mothers who, to nuzzle up their babes,
Thought naught too curious, are ready now
To eat those little darlings whom they loved.
So sharp are hunger's teeth that man and wife
Draw lots who first shall die to lengthen life.
Here stands a lord and there a lady weeping;
Here many sink, yet those which see them fall
Have scarce strength left to give them burial.
Is not this true?
Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it.
And her prosperities so largely taste,
With their superfluous riots, hear these tears.
The misery of Tarsus may be theirs.
Speak out thy sorrows, which thee bring'st in haste,
For comfort is too far for us to expect.
We have descried upon our neighboring shore
One sorrow never comes but brings an heir
That may succeed as his inheritor;
And so in ours. Some neighboring nation,
Taking advantage of our misery,
Hath stuffed the hollow vessels with their power
To beat us down, the which are down already,
And make a conquest of unhappy men,
Whereas no glory's got to overcome.
That's the least fear, for, by the semblance
Of their white flags displayed, they bring us peace
And come to us as favorers, not as foes.
Thou speak'st like him's untutored to repeat
But bring they what they will and what they can,
What need we fear?
The ground's the lowest, and we are halfway there.
Go tell their general we attend him here,
To know for what he comes and whence he comes
And what he craves.
Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist;
If wars, we are unable to resist.
Lord Governor, for so we hear you are,
Let not our ships and number of our men
Be like a beacon fired t' amaze your eyes.
We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre
And seen the desolation of your streets;
Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears,
But to relieve them of their heavy load;
And these our ships, you happily may think
Are like the Trojan horse was stuffed within
With bloody veins expecting overthrow,
Are stored with corn to make your needy bread
And give them life whom hunger starved half dead.
The gods of Greece protect you, and we'll pray for
We do not look for reverence, but for love,
And harborage for ourself, our ships, and men.
The which when any shall not gratify
Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought,
Be it our wives, our children, or ourselves,
The curse of heaven and men succeed their evils!
Till when--the which I hope shall ne'er be seen--
Your Grace is welcome to our town and us.
Which welcome we'll accept, feast here awhile,
Until our stars that frown lend us a smile.
Here have you seen a mighty king
His child, iwis, to incest bring;
That will prove awful both in deed and word.
Be quiet, then, as men should be,
Till he hath passed necessity.
Losing a mite, a mountain gain.
The good in conversation,
To whom I give my benison,
Is still at Tarsus, where each man
Thinks all is Writ he speken can,
And, to remember what he does,
Build his statue to make him glorious.
But tidings to the contrary
Are brought your eyes. What need speak I?
Enter at one door Pericles talking with Cleon, all the
Cleon. Pericles gives the Messenger a reward and knights
Good Helicane, that stayed at home--
Not to eat honey like a drone
From others' labors, for though he strive
To killen bad, keep good alive,
And to fulfill his prince' desire--
Sends word of all that haps in Tyre:
How Thaliard came full bent with sin,
And had intent to murder him;
And that in Tarsus was not best
Longer for him to make his rest.
He, doing so, put forth to seas,
Where when men been there's seldom ease;
For now the wind begins to blow;
Thunder above and deeps below
Makes such unquiet that the ship
Should house him safe is wracked and split,
And he, good prince, having all lost,
By waves from coast to coast is tossed.
All perishen of man, of pelf,
Ne aught escapend but himself;
Till Fortune, tired with doing bad,
Threw him ashore to give him glad.
And here he comes. What shall be next,
Pardon old Gower--this 'longs the text.
Yet cease your ire, you angry stars of heaven!
Wind, rain, and thunder, remember earthly man
Is but a substance that must yield to you,
And I, as fits my nature, do obey you.
Alas, the seas hath cast me on the rocks,
Washed me from shore to shore, and left my breath
Nothing to think on but ensuing death.
Let it suffice the greatness of your powers
To have bereft a prince of all his fortunes;
And, having thrown him from your wat'ry grave,
Here to have death in peace is all he'll crave.
They say they're half fish, half flesh. A plague
Master, I marvel how the fishes live in the sea.
How from the finny subject of the sea
These fishers tell the infirmities of men,
And from their wat'ry empire recollect
All that may men approve or men detect!--
Peace be at your labor, honest fishermen.
May see the sea hath cast upon your coast--
In that vast tennis court hath made the ball
For them to play upon entreats you pity him.
He asks of you that never used to beg.
What I have been I have forgot to know,
But what I am want teaches me to think on:
And have no more of life than may suffice
To give my tongue that heat to ask your help--
Which, if you shall refuse, when I am dead,
For that I am a man, pray you see me buried.
How well this honest mirth becomes their labor!
How far is his court distant from this shore?
An armor, friends? I pray you let me see it.
Thanks, Fortune, yet, that after all thy crosses
Thou givest me somewhat to repair myself;
And though it was mine own, part of my heritage
Which my dead father did bequeath to me
With this strict charge even as he left his life,
The which the gods protect thee from--may 't
It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it,
Till the rough seas, that spares not any man,
Took it in rage, though calmed have given 't again.
Since I have here my father gave in his will.
To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth,
For it was sometime target to a king;
And for his sake I wish the having of it,
And that you'd guide me to your sovereign's court,
Where with it I may appear a gentleman.
And if that ever my low fortune's better,
By your furtherance I am clothed in steel,
And spite of all the rupture of the sea,
This jewel holds his biding on my arm.
Unto thy value I will mount myself
Upon a courser, whose delightful steps
Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread.
Only, my friend, I yet am unprovided
Of a pair of bases.
Then honor be but a goal to my will;
This day I'll rise or else add ill to ill.
Are the knights ready to begin the triumph?
And stay your coming to present themselves.
Return them we are ready, and our daughter here,
In honor of whose birth these triumphs are,
Sits here like Beauty's child, whom Nature gat
For men to see and, seeing, wonder at.
It pleaseth you, my royal father, to express
My commendations great, whose merit's less.
It's fit it should be so, for princes are
As jewels lose their glory if neglected,
So princes their renowns if not respected.
The labor of each knight in his device.
Which to preserve mine honor, I'll perform.
Who is the first that doth prefer himself?
And the device he bears upon his shield
Is a black Ethiop reaching at the sun;
The word: Lux tua vita mihi.
He loves you well that holds his life of you.
Who is the second that presents himself?
And the device he bears upon his shield
Is an armed knight that's conquered by a lady.
The motto thus, in Spanish: Pue per doleera kee per
And what's the third?
And his device a wreath of chivalry;
The word: Me pompae provexit apex.
The word: Qui me alit me extinguit.
Which shows that beauty hath his power and will,
Which can as well inflame as it can kill.
The fifth, an hand environed with clouds,
Holding out gold that's by the touchstone tried;
The motto thus: Sic spectanda fides.
And what's the sixth and last, the which the knight
With such a graceful courtesy delivered?
He seems to be a stranger; but his present is
The motto: In hac spe vivo.
From the dejected state wherein he is,
He hopes by you his fortunes yet may flourish.
He had need mean better than his outward show
Can any way speak in his just commend,
For by his rusty outside he appears
To have practiced more the whipstock than the lance.
He well may be a stranger, for he comes
To an honored triumph strangely furnished.
And on set purpose let his armor rust
Until this day, to scour it in the dust.
Opinion's but a fool that makes us scan
The outward habit by the inward man.
But stay, the knights are coming.
We will withdraw into the gallery.
Lords, Attendants, and Knights in armor, from tilting.]
To say you're welcome were superfluous.
To place upon the volume of your deeds,
As in a title page, your worth in arms
Were more than you expect or more than 's fit,
Since every worth in show commends itself.
Prepare for mirth, for mirth becomes a feast.
You are princes and my guests.
To whom this wreath of victory I give
And crown you king of this day's happiness.
Call it by what you will, the day is yours,
And here, I hope, is none that envies it.
In framing an artist, Art hath thus decreed,
To make some good but others to exceed,
And you are her labored scholar.--Come, queen o'
For, daughter, so you are; here, take your place.--
Marshal, the rest as they deserve their grace.
We are honored much by good Simonides.
Your presence glads our days. Honor we love,
For who hates honor hates the gods above.
Contend not, sir, for we are gentlemen
Have neither in our hearts nor outward eyes
Envies the great, nor shall the low despise.
You are right courteous knights.
These cates resist me, he not thought upon.
By Juno, that is queen of marriage,
All viands that I eat do seem unsavory,
Wishing him my meat.--Sure, he's a gallant
He's but a country gentleman;
Has done no more than other knights have done;
Has broken a staff or so. So let it pass.
To me he seems like diamond to glass.
Yon king's to me like to my father's picture,
Which tells in that glory once he was--
Had princes sit like stars about his throne,
And he the sun for them to reverence.
None that beheld him but like lesser lights
Did vail their crowns to his supremacy;
Where now his son's like a glowworm in the night,
The which hath fire in darkness, none in light;
Whereby I see that Time's the king of men.
He's both their parent, and he is their grave,
And gives them what he will, not what they crave.
Who can be other in this royal presence?
Here, with a cup that's stored unto the brim,
As do you love, fill to your mistress' lips.
We drink this health to you.	
Yet pause awhile. Yon knight doth sit too melancholy,
As if the entertainment in our court
Had not a show might countervail his worth.--
Note it not you, Thaisa?
Should live like gods above, who freely give
To everyone that come to honor them.
And princes not doing so are like to gnats,
Which make a sound but, killed, are wondered at.
Therefore, to make his entrance more sweet,
Here, say we drink this standing-bowl of wine to him.
Alas, my father, it befits not me
Unto a stranger knight to be so bold.
He may my proffer take for an offense,
Since men take women's gifts for impudence.
Do as I bid you, or you'll move me else.
Now, by the gods, he could not please me better.
And furthermore tell him we desire to know of him
Of whence he is, his name and parentage.
The King, my father, sir, has drunk to you.
Wishing it so much blood unto your life.
And further, he desires to know of you
Of whence you are, your name and parentage.
My education been in arts and arms,
Who, looking for adventures in the world,
Was by the rough seas reft of ships and men,
And after shipwrack driven upon this shore.
He thanks your Grace; names himself Pericles,
Who only by misfortune of the seas,
Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore.
Now, by the gods, I pity his misfortune,
And will awake him from his melancholy.--
Come, gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles
And waste the time which looks for other revels.
Even in your armors, as you are addressed,
Will well become a soldiers' dance.
Since they love men in arms as well as beds.
So, this was well asked, 'twas so well performed.
Come, sir.	
Here's a lady that wants breathing too,
And I have heard you knights of Tyre
Are excellent in making ladies trip,
And that their measures are as excellent.
In those that practice them they are, my lord.
Of your fair courtesy.	
Unclasp, unclasp!
Thanks, gentlemen, to all; all have done well;
These knights unto their several lodgings. 
Pericles.] Yours, sir,
We have given order be next our own.
Princes, it is too late to talk of love,
And that's the mark I know you level at.
Therefore each one betake him to his rest,
Tomorrow all for speeding do their best.
No, Escanes, know this of me:
Antiochus from incest lived not free,
For which the most high gods not minding longer
To withhold the vengeance that they had in store
Due to this heinous capital offense,
Even in the height and pride of all his glory,
When he was seated in a chariot of
An inestimable value, and his daughter with him,
Those bodies even to loathing, for they so stunk
That all those eyes adored them, ere their fall,
Scorn now their hand should give them burial.
And yet but justice; for though this king were great,
His greatness was no guard to bar heaven's shaft,
But sin had his reward.
See, not a man in private conference
Or counsel has respect with him but he.
It shall no longer grieve without reproof.
And cursed be he that will not second it.
Follow me, then.--Lord Helicane, a word.
With me? And welcome. Happy day, my lords.
Know that our griefs are risen to the top,
And now at length they overflow their banks.
Your griefs? For what? Wrong not your prince you
Wrong not yourself, then, noble Helicane.
But if the Prince do live, let us salute him,
Or know what ground's made happy by his breath.
If in the world he live, we'll seek him out;
If in his grave he rest, we'll find him there,
And be resolved he lives to govern us,
Or dead, give 's cause to mourn his funeral
And leave us to our free election.
Whose death's indeed the strongest in our censure;
And knowing this kingdom is without a head--
Like goodly buildings left without a roof
Soon fall to ruin--your noble self,
That best know how to rule and how to reign,
We thus submit unto, our sovereign.
Try honor's cause; forbear your suffrages.
If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear.
Take I your wish, I leap into the seas,
Where's hourly trouble for a minute's ease.
To forbear the absence of your king;
If in which time expired, he not return,
But if I cannot win you to this love,
Go search like nobles, like noble subjects,
And in your search spend your adventurous worth,
Whom if you find and win unto return,
You shall like diamonds sit about his crown.
To wisdom he's a fool that will not yield.
And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us,
We with our travels will endeavor.
Then you love us, we you, and we'll clasp hands.
When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands.
Good morrow to the good Simonides.
Knights, from my daughter this I let you know,
That for this twelvemonth she'll not undertake
Which from her by no means can I get.
May we not get access to her, my lord?
Faith, by no means; she hath so strictly tied her
To her chamber that 'tis impossible.
One twelve moons more she'll wear Diana's livery.
This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vowed,
And on her virgin honor will not break it.
Loath to bid farewell, we take our leaves.
They are well dispatched. Now to my daughter's letter.
She tells me here she'll wed the stranger knight
Or never more to view nor day nor light.
Not minding whether I dislike or no!
Well, I do commend her choice, and will no longer
Have it be delayed. Soft, here he comes.
All fortune to the good Simonides.
To you as much. Sir, I am beholding to you
For your sweet music this last night. I do
Protest, my ears were never better fed
With such delightful pleasing harmony.
It is your Grace's pleasure to commend,
Not my desert.
The worst of all her scholars, my good lord.
What do you think of my daughter, sir?
As a fair day in summer, wondrous fair.
Sir, my daughter thinks very well of you,
Ay, so well that you must be her master,
And she will be your scholar. Therefore, look to it.
She thinks not so. Peruse this writing else.
That never aimed so high to love your daughter,
But bent all offices to honor her.
Thou hast bewitched my daughter, and thou art
Never did thought of mine levy offense;
Nor never did my actions yet commence
Traitor, thou liest!
Even in his throat, unless it be the King
That calls me traitor, I return the lie.
Now, by the gods, I do applaud his courage.
My actions are as noble as my thoughts,
That never relished of a base descent.
And not to be a rebel to her state,
And he that otherwise accounts of me,
This sword shall prove he's honor's enemy.
Here comes my daughter. She can witness it.
Then as you are as virtuous as fair,
Resolve your angry father if my tongue
Did e'er solicit or my hand subscribe
To any syllable that made love to you.
Why, sir, say if you had, who takes offense
At that would make me glad?
Yea, mistress, are you so peremptory?
Will you, not having my consent,
Bestow your love and your affections
Upon a stranger?  Who, for aught I know,
May be--nor can I think the contrary--
As great in blood as I myself.--
Therefore, hear you, mistress: either frame
Your will to mine--and you, sir, hear you:
Either be ruled by me--or I'll make you
Man and wife.
Nay, come, your hands and lips must seal it too.
And being joined, I'll thus your hopes destroy.
And for further grief--God give you joy!
What, are you both pleased?
Even as my life my blood that fosters it.
It pleaseth me so well that I will see you wed,
And then with what haste you can, get you to bed.
Now sleep yslacked hath the rout;
No din but snores about the house,
Made louder by the o'erfed breast
Of this most pompous marriage feast.
The cat with eyne of burning coal
Now couches from the mouse's hole,
And crickets sing at the oven's mouth
Are the blither for their drouth.
Hymen hath brought the bride to bed,
Where, by the loss of maidenhead,
And time that is so briefly spent
With your fine fancies quaintly eche.
What's dumb in show I'll plain with speech.
Enter Pericles and Simonides at one door with
Attendants. A Messenger meets them, kneels, and gives
Pericles a letter. Pericles shows it Simonides. The Lords
Lychorida, a nurse. The King shows her the letter. She
Simonides and the others exit.
By many a dern and painful perch
Of Pericles the careful search,
By the four opposing coigns
Which the world together joins,
Is made with all due diligence
That horse and sail and high expense
Can stead the quest. At last from Tyre,
Fame answering the most strange enquire,
To th' court of King Simonides
Are letters brought, the tenor these:
Antiochus and his daughter dead,
The men of Tyrus on the head
Of Helicanus would set on
The crown of Tyre, but he will none.
The mutiny he there hastes t' oppress,
Says to 'em, if King Pericles
Come not home in twice six moons,
He, obedient to their dooms,
Will take the crown. The sum of this,
Brought hither to Pentapolis,
And everyone with claps can sound,
Who dreamt, who thought of such a thing?"
Brief, he must hence depart to Tyre.
His queen, with child, makes her desire--
Which who shall cross?--along to go.
Omit we all their dole and woe.
Lychorida, her nurse, she takes,
And so to sea. Their vessel shakes
On Neptune's billow. Half the flood
Hath their keel cut. But Fortune, moved,
Varies again. The grizzled North
Disgorges such a tempest forth
That, as a duck for life that dives,
So up and down the poor ship drives.
The lady shrieks and, well-anear,
Does fall in travail with her fear.
And what ensues in this fell storm
Shall for itself itself perform.
Conveniently the rest convey,
Which might not what by me is told.
In your imagination hold
This stage the ship upon whose deck
The sea-tossed Pericles appears to speak.
The god of this great vast, rebuke these surges,
Which wash both heaven and hell! And thou that hast
Upon the winds command, bind them in brass,
Having called them from the deep! O, still
Thy deaf'ning dreadful thunders, gently quench
Thy nimble sulfurous flashes.--O, how, Lychorida,
How does my queen?--Then, storm, venomously
Wilt thou spit all thyself? The seaman's whistle
Is as a whisper in the ears of death,
Unheard.--Lychorida!--Lucina, O
Divinest patroness and midwife gentle
To those that cry by night, convey thy deity
Aboard our dancing boat, make swift the pangs
Of my queen's travails!--Now, Lychorida!
Here is a thing too young for such a place,
Who, if it had conceit, would die, as I
Am like to do. Take in your arms this piece
Of your dead queen.
Patience, good sir. Do not assist the storm.
Here's all that is left living of your queen,
Be manly and take comfort.
Why do you make us love your goodly gifts
And snatch them straight away? We here below
Recall not what we give, and therein may
Use honor with you.
Even for this charge.	
For a more blusterous birth had never babe.
Quiet and gentle thy conditions, for
Thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world
That ever was prince's child. Happy what follows!
Thou hast as chiding a nativity
As fire, air, water, earth, and heaven can make
To herald thee from the womb.
Even at the first, thy loss is more than can
Thy portage quit, with all thou canst find here.
Now the good gods throw their best eyes upon 't.
Courage enough. I do not fear the flaw.
It hath done to me the worst. Yet for the love
Of this poor infant, this fresh new seafarer,
Therefore briefly yield 'er, for she must overboard
No light, no fire. Th' unfriendly elements
Forgot thee utterly. Nor have I time
To give thee hallowed to thy grave, but straight
Must cast thee, scarcely coffined, in the ooze,
Where, for a monument upon thy bones
And e'er-remaining lamps, the belching whale
And humming water must o'erwhelm thy corpse,
Lying with simple shells.--O, Lychorida,
Bid Nestor bring me spices, ink, and paper,
My casket and my jewels; and bid Nicander
Bring me the satin coffin. Lay the babe
Upon the pillow. Hie thee, whiles I say
Alter thy course for Tyre. When canst thou reach it?
There will I visit Cleon, for the babe
Cannot hold out to Tyrus. There I'll leave it
At careful nursing. Go thy ways, good mariner.
Till now, I ne'er endured.
Your master will be dead ere you return.
There's nothing can be ministered to nature
That can recover him.  Give
And tell me how it works.	
Gentlemen, why do you stir so early?
Our lodgings, standing bleak upon the sea,
Shook as the earth did quake.
The very principals did seem to rend
And all to topple. Pure surprise and fear
Made me to quit the house.
That is the cause we trouble you so early.
But I much marvel that your Lordship, having
Rich tire about you, should at these early hours
Shake off the golden slumber of repose.
Nature should be so conversant with pain,
Being thereto not compelled.
Virtue and cunning were endowments greater
Than nobleness and riches. Careless heirs
May the two latter darken and expend,
But immortality attends the former,
Making a man a god. 'Tis known I ever
Have studied physic, through which secret art,
By turning o'er authorities, I have,
Together with my practice, made familiar
To me and to my aid the blessed infusions
That dwells in vegetives, in metals, stones;
And can speak of the disturbances
That Nature works, and of her cures; which doth
Than to be thirsty after tottering honor,
Or tie my pleasure up in silken bags
To please the fool and death.
Your Honor has through Ephesus poured forth
Your charity, and hundreds call themselves
Your creatures, who by you have been restored;
And not your knowledge, your personal pain, but even
Your purse, still open, hath built Lord Cerimon
Such strong renown, as time shall never--
So, lift there.
Did the sea toss up upon our shore this chest.
If the sea's stomach be o'ercharged with gold,
Did the sea cast it up?
As tossed it upon shore.
Soft! It smells most sweetly in my sense.
As ever hit my nostril. So, up with it.
Shrouded in cloth of state, balmed and entreasured
With full bags of spices. A passport too!
Apollo, perfect me in the characters.
If thou livest, Pericles, thou hast a heart
That ever cracks for woe. This chanced tonight.
Most likely, sir.
For look how fresh she looks. They were too rough
That threw her in the sea.--Make a fire within;
Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet.
Death may usurp on nature many hours,
And yet the fire of life kindle again
The o'erpressed spirits. I heard of an Egyptian
That had nine hours lain dead,
Who was by good appliance recovered.
Well said, well said! The fire and cloths.
The rough and woeful music that we have,
Cause it to sound, beseech you.  The
How thou stirr'st, thou block! The music there.
This queen will live. Nature awakes a warm breath
Out of her. She hath not been entranced
Above five hours. See how she gins to blow
Into life's flower again.
Increase our wonder, and sets up your fame
Forever.
Cases to those heavenly jewels which Pericles hath
Begin to part their fringes of bright gold.
The diamonds of a most praised water doth
Appear to make the world twice rich.--Live,
And make us weep to hear your fate, fair creature,
Rare as you seem to be.
Where am I? Where's my lord? What world is this?
Lend me your hands. To the next chamber bear her.
Get linen. Now this matter must be looked to,
For her relapse is mortal. Come, come;
And Aesculapius guide us.
Lychorida with the child.]
Most honored Cleon, I must needs be gone.
My twelve months are expired, and Tyrus stands
In a litigious peace. You and your lady
Take from my heart all thankfulness. The gods
Make up the rest upon you.
Your shakes of fortune, though they haunt you
Yet glance full wond'ringly on us.
You had brought her hither to have blessed mine
We cannot but obey the powers above us.
Could I rage and roar as doth the sea
She lies in, yet the end must be as 'tis.
My gentle babe Marina,
Whom, for she was born at sea, I have named so,
Here I charge your charity withal,
Leaving her the infant of your care,
Beseeching you to give her princely training,
That she may be mannered as she is born.
Your Grace, that fed my country with your corn,
For which the people's prayers still fall upon you,
Must in your child be thought on. If neglection
Should therein make me vile, the common body,
By you relieved, would force me to my duty.
But if to that my nature need a spur,
The gods revenge it upon me and mine,
To the end of generation!
Your honor and your goodness teach me to 't
Without your vows.--Till she be married, madam,
By bright Diana, whom we honor, all
Unscissored shall this hair of mine remain,
Though I show ill in 't. So I take my leave.
Good madam, make me blessed in your care
In bringing up my child.
Who shall not be more dear to my respect
Than yours, my lord.
We'll bring your Grace e'en to the edge o' th' shore,
Then give you up to the masked Neptune
And the gentlest winds of heaven.
Look to your little mistress, on whose grace
You may depend hereafter.--Come, my lord.
Madam, this letter and some certain jewels
Lay with you in your coffer, which are
At your command. Know you the character?
It is my lord's. That I was shipped at sea
But whether there delivered, by the holy gods
My wedded lord, I ne'er shall see again,
And never more have joy.
You purpose as you speak, Diana's temple
Is not distant far, where you may abide
Till your date expire. Moreover, if you
Please, a niece of mine shall there attend you.
My recompense is thanks, that's all;
Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.
Imagine Pericles arrived at Tyre,
Welcomed and settled to his own desire.
His woeful queen we leave at Ephesus,
Unto Diana there 's a votaress.
Now to Marina bend your mind,
Whom our fast-growing scene must find
At Tarsus, and by Cleon trained
In music, letters; who hath gained
Of education all the grace
Which makes high both the art and place
Of general wonder. But, alack,
That monster envy, oft the wrack
Of earned praise, Marina's life
Seeks to take off by treason's knife.
And in this kind our Cleon hath
One daughter and a full grown wench,
Even ripe for marriage rite. This maid
Hight Philoten, and it is said
For certain in our story she
Would ever with Marina be.
Be 't when they weaved the sleided silk
With fingers long, small, white as milk;
Or when she would with sharp needle wound
The cambric, which she made more sound
By hurting it; or when to the lute
She sung, and made the night bird mute,
That still records with moan; or when
She would with rich and constant pen
Vail to her mistress Dian, still
This Philoten contends in skill
With absolute Marina. So
With the dove of Paphos might the crow
Vie feathers white. Marina gets
All praises, which are paid as debts
And not as given. This so darks
In Philoten all graceful marks
That Cleon's wife, with envy rare,
For good Marina, that her daughter
Might stand peerless by this slaughter.
The sooner her vile thoughts to stead,
Lychorida, our nurse, is dead,
And cursed Dionyza hath
The pregnant instrument of wrath
Prest for this blow. The unborn event
Only I carry winged Time
Post on the lame feet of my rhyme,
Which never could I so convey
Unless your thoughts went on my way.
Dionyza does appear,
With Leonine, a murderer.
Thy oath remember. Thou hast sworn to do 't.
Thou canst not do a thing in the world so soon
To yield thee so much profit. Let not conscience,
Which is but cold in flaming, thy bosom inflame
Too nicely. Nor let pity, which even women
Have cast off, melt thee; but be a soldier
To thy purpose.
She is a goodly creature.
The gods should have her. Here she comes weeping
For her only mistress' death. Thou art resolved?
No, I will rob Tellus of her weed
To strew thy green with flowers. The yellows, blues,
The purple violets and marigolds
Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave
While summer days doth last. Ay me, poor maid,
Born in a tempest when my mother died,
This world to me is as a lasting storm,
Whirring me from my friends.
How now, Marina? Why do you keep alone?
How chance my daughter is not with you?
Do not consume your blood with sorrowing.
Have you a nurse of me! Lord, how your favor 's
Changed with this unprofitable woe.
Come, give me your flowers. O'er the sea marge
Walk with Leonine. The air is quick there,
And it pierces and sharpens the stomach.--Come,
Leonine,
Take her by the arm. Walk with her.
With more than foreign heart. We every day
Expect him here. When he shall come and find
Our paragon to all reports thus blasted,
He will repent the breadth of his great voyage,
Blame both my lord and me that we have taken
No care to your best courses. Go, I pray you,
Walk, and be cheerful once again. Reserve
That excellent complexion, which did steal
The eyes of young and old. Care not for me.
But yet I have no desire to it.
Leonine, at the least. Remember
What I have said.
Pray walk softly; do not heat your blood.
What, I must have care of you.
Is this wind westerly that blows?
When I was born, the wind was north.
My father, as nurse says, did never fear,
But cried "Good seamen!" to the sailors,
Galling his kingly hands haling ropes,
And, clasping to the mast, endured a sea
That almost burst the deck.
Never was waves nor wind more violent,
And from the ladder-tackle washes off
And with a dropping industry they skip
From stern to stern. The Boatswain whistles, and
The Master calls and trebles their confusion.
If you require a little space for prayer,
The gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn
To do my work with haste.
Now, as I can remember, by my troth,
To any living creature. Believe me, la,
But I wept for 't. How have I offended
Wherein my death might yield her any profit
Or my life imply her any danger?
Is not to reason of the deed, but do 't.
You will not do 't for all the world, I hope.
You are well-favored, and your looks foreshow
You have a gentle heart. I saw you lately
When you caught hurt in parting two that fought.
Good sooth, it showed well in you. Do so now.
Your lady seeks my life. Come you between,
And save poor me, the weaker.
And will dispatch.	
These roguing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes,
And they have seized Marina. Let her go.
There's no hope she will return. I'll swear she's dead,
And thrown into the sea. But I'll see further.
Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her,
Not carry her aboard. If she remain,
Whom they have ravished must by me be slain.
Therefore, if in our youths we could pick up some
Alack that Leonine was so slack, so slow!
He should have struck, not spoke. Or that these
Not enough barbarous, had but o'erboard thrown me
For to seek my mother.
Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market?
Spaniard's mouth watered an he went to bed to her
French knight that cowers i' the hams?
To weep that you live as you do makes pity in your
These blushes of hers must be quenched with
If fires be hot, knives sharp, or waters deep,
Untied I still my virgin knot will keep.
Diana aid my purpose!
Why, are you foolish? Can it be undone?
The sun and moon ne'er looked upon!
Were I chief lord of all this spacious world,
Much less in blood than virtue, yet a princess
To equal any single crown o' th' Earth
Whom thou hast poisoned too!
If thou hadst drunk to him, 't had been a kindness
Becoming well thy face. What canst thou say
When noble Pericles shall demand his child?
That she is dead. Nurses are not the Fates.
To foster is not ever to preserve.
She died at night; I'll say so. Who can cross it
Unless you play the impious innocent
And, for an honest attribute, cry out
Of all the faults beneath the heavens, the gods
Do like this worst.
The petty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence
And open this to Pericles. I do shame
To think of what a noble strain you are,
And of how coward a spirit.
Whoever but his approbation added,
Though not his prime consent, he did not flow
From honorable courses.
Yet none does know but you how she came dead,
Nor none can know, Leonine being gone.
She did distain my child and stood between
Her and her fortunes. None would look on her,
But cast their gazes on Marina's face,
Whilst ours was blurted at and held a malkin
Not worth the time of day. It pierced me through,
And though you call my course unnatural,
You not your child well loving, yet I find
It greets me as an enterprise of kindness
Performed to your sole daughter.
What should he say? We wept after her hearse,
And yet we mourn. Her monument is
Almost finished, and her epitaphs
In glitt'ring golden characters express
At whose expense 'tis done.
Which, to betray, dost with thine angel's face
Seize with thine eagle's talons.
You're like one that superstitiously
Do swear to the gods that winter kills the flies.
But yet I know you'll do as I advise.
Thus time we waste, and long leagues make short,
Sail seas in cockles, have and wish but for 't,
Making to take our imagination
From bourn to bourn, region to region.
By you being pardoned, we commit no crime
To use one language in each several clime
Where our scenes seems to live. I do beseech you
To learn of me, who stand in the gaps to teach you
The stages of our story. Pericles
Is now again thwarting the wayward seas,
Attended on by many a lord and knight,
To see his daughter, all his life's delight.
Old Helicanus goes along. Behind
Is left to govern it, you bear in mind,
Old Escanes, whom Helicanus late
Advanced in time to great and high estate.
Well-sailing ships and bounteous winds have brought
This king to Tarsus--think his pilot thought;
So with his steerage shall your thoughts go on--
To fetch his daughter home, who first is gone.
Like motes and shadows see them move awhile;
Your ears unto your eyes I'll reconcile.
Enter Pericles at one door, with all his train, Cleon and
Dionyza at the other. Cleon shows Pericles the tomb,
See how belief may suffer by foul show!
This borrowed passion stands for true old woe.
And Pericles, in sorrow all devoured,
With sighs shot through and biggest tears
Leaves Tarsus and again embarks. He swears
Never to wash his face nor cut his hairs.
He puts on sackcloth, and to sea. He bears
And yet he rides it out. Now please you wit
The epitaph is for Marina writ
By wicked Dionyza:
No visor does become black villainy
So well as soft and tender flattery.
Let Pericles believe his daughter's dead,
And bear his courses to be ordered
By Lady Fortune, while our scene must play
His daughter's woe and heavy welladay
In her unholy service. Patience, then,
And think you now are all in Mytilene.	
Did you ever dream of such a thing?
Priapus and undo a whole generation. We must
Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.
Wholesome iniquity have you that a man may deal
Leave us.
If you were born to honor, show it now;
If put upon you, make the judgment good
That thought you worthy of it.
How's this? How's this? Some more. Be sage.
That am a maid, though most ungentle Fortune
Have placed me in this sty, where, since I came,
Diseases have been sold dearer than physic--
That the gods
Would set me free from this unhallowed place,
Though they did change me to the meanest bird
That flies i' the purer air!
Thou couldst have spoke so well, ne'er dreamt thou
Had I brought hither a corrupted mind,
Thy speech had altered it. Hold, here's gold for thee.
Persevere in that clear way thou goest
And the gods strengthen thee!	
That I came with no ill intent, for to me
The very doors and windows savor vilely.
Fare thee well. Thou art a piece of virtue,
And I doubt not but thy training hath been noble.
Hold, here's more gold for thee.	
That robs thee of thy goodness! If thou dost
Hear from me, it shall be for thy good.
Your house, but for this virgin that doth prop it,
Would sink and overwhelm you. Away!	
Come your ways, I say.
She's born to undo us.--Will you not go the way of
What canst thou wish thine enemy to be?
Neither of these are so bad as thou art,
Since they do better thee in their command.
Thou hold'st a place for which the pained'st fiend
Of hell would not in reputation change.
Thou art the damned doorkeeper to every
Coistrel that comes enquiring for his Tib.
To the choleric fisting of every rogue
Thy ear is liable. Thy food is such
As hath been belched on by infected lungs.
Do anything but this thou dost. Empty
Old receptacles, or common shores, of filth;
Serve by indenture to the common hangman.
Any of these ways are yet better than this.
For what thou professest, a baboon, could he speak,
Would own a name too dear. That the gods
Would safely deliver me from this place!
Here, here's gold for thee.	
If that thy master would gain by me,
Proclaim that I can sing, weave, sew, and dance,
With other virtues which I'll keep from boast,
And will undertake all these to teach.
Will yield many scholars.
Prove that I cannot, take me home again
And prostitute me to the basest groom
That doth frequent your house.
But since my master and mistress hath bought
Come your ways.
Marina thus the brothel 'scapes, and chances
She sings like one immortal, and she dances
Deep clerks she dumbs, and with her neele composes
That even her art sisters the natural roses.
That pupils lacks she none of noble race,
She gives the cursed bawd. Here we her place,
Where we left him, on the sea. We there him lost,
Here where his daughter dwells; and on this coast
God Neptune's annual feast to keep, from whence
His banners sable, trimmed with rich expense,
In your supposing once more put your sight
Where what is done in action--more, if might--
Tyrian ship and one from Mytilene.]
Where is Lord Helicanus? He can resolve you.
Sir, there is a barge put off from Mytilene,
And in it is Lysimachus, the Governor,
Who craves to come aboard. What is your will?
That he have his.	
Call up some gentlemen.
Doth your Lordship call?
There is some of worth would come aboard.
This is the man that can, in aught you would,
Resolve you.
Hail, reverend sir. The gods preserve you.
And die as I would do.
Being on shore, honoring of Neptune's triumphs,
Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us,
Our vessel is of Tyre, in it the King,
To anyone, nor taken sustenance
But to prorogue his grief.
Upon what ground is his distemperature?
But the main grief springs from the loss
Of a beloved daughter and a wife.
But bootless is your sight. He will not speak
To any.
Behold him.  This was a goodly
Till the disaster that one mortal night
Drove him to this.
Sir king, all hail! The gods preserve you. Hail,
Royal sir!
It is in vain; he will not speak to you.
Sir, we have a maid in Mytilene,
She, questionless, with her sweet harmony
And other chosen attractions, would allure
And make a batt'ry through his defended ports,
Which now are midway stopped.
She is all happy as the fairest of all,
And, with her fellow maid, is now upon
The leafy shelter that abuts against
The island's side.
Sure, all effectless; yet nothing we'll omit
That bears recovery's name.
But since your kindness
We have stretched thus far, let us beseech you
That for our gold we may provision have,
Wherein we are not destitute for want,
But weary for the staleness.
Which, if we should deny, the most just God
For every graft would send a caterpillar,
And so inflict our province. Yet once more
Let me entreat to know at large the cause
Of your king's sorrow.
Sit, sir, I will recount it to you. But see,
Welcome, fair one.--Is 't not a goodly presence?
She's such a one that, were I well assured
Came of a gentle kind and noble stock,
Fair one, all goodness that consists in beauty:
Expect even here, where is a kingly patient,
If that thy prosperous and artificial feat
Can draw him but to answer thee in aught,
Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay
As thy desires can wish.
My utmost skill in his recovery, provided
That none but I and my companion maid
Be suffered to come near him.
Leave her, and the gods make her prosperous.
Marked he your music?
See, she will speak to him.
That ne'er before invited eyes, but have
Been gazed on like a comet. She speaks,
My lord, that may be hath endured a grief
Might equal yours, if both were justly weighed.
Though wayward Fortune did malign my state,
My derivation was from ancestors
Who stood equivalent with mighty kings.
But time hath rooted out my parentage,
And to the world and awkward casualties
Bound me in servitude.  I will desist,
But there is something glows upon my cheek,
And whispers in mine ear "Go not till he speak."
My fortunes--parentage--good parentage,
To equal mine! Was it not thus? What say you?
You would not do me violence.
Pray you turn your eyes upon me.
You're like something that--What
Here of these shores?
Yet I was mortally brought forth, and am
No other than I appear.
My dearest wife was like this maid, and such
Square brows, her stature to an inch;
As wandlike straight, as silver-voiced; her eyes
As jewel-like, and cased as richly; in pace
Another Juno; who starves the ears she feeds
And makes them hungry the more she gives them
Where do you live?
From the deck you may discern the place.
Where were you bred? And how achieved you these
Endowments which you make more rich to owe?
If I should tell my history, it would seem
Like lies disdained in the reporting.
Falseness cannot come from thee, for thou lookest
Modest as Justice, and thou seemest a palace
For the crowned Truth to dwell in. I will believe thee
And make my senses credit thy relation
To points that seem impossible, for thou lookest
Like one I loved indeed. What were thy friends?
Didst thou not say, when I did push thee back--
Which was when I perceived thee--that thou cam'st
From good descending?
Report thy parentage. I think thou said'st
Thou hadst been tossed from wrong to injury,
And that thou thought'st thy griefs might equal mine,
If both were opened.
And said no more but what my thoughts
Did warrant me was likely.
If thine considered prove the thousand part
Of my endurance, thou art a man, and I
Have suffered like a girl. Yet thou dost look
Like Patience gazing on kings' graves and smiling
Extremity out of act. What were thy friends?
How lost thou them? Thy name, my most kind
Recount, I do beseech thee. Come, sit by me.
My name is Marina.
And thou by some incensed god sent hither
To make the world to laugh at me!
Or here I'll cease.
Thou little know'st how thou dost startle me
To call thyself Marina.
Was given me by one that had some power--
My father, and a king.
And called Marina?
But not to be a troubler of your peace,
Have you a working pulse, and are no fairy
Motion? Well, speak on. Where were you born?
And wherefore called Marina?
For I was born at sea.
My mother was the daughter of a king,
Who died the minute I was born,
As my good nurse Lychorida hath oft
Delivered weeping.
Did mock sad fools withal. This cannot be
My daughter, buried.--Well, where were you bred?
And never interrupt you.
You scorn. Believe me, 'twere best I did give o'er.
Of what you shall deliver. Yet give me leave:
How came you in these parts? Where were you bred?
The King my father did in Tarsus leave me,
Till cruel Cleon with his wicked wife
Did seek to murder me; and having wooed a villain
To attempt it, who, having drawn to do 't,
Brought me to Mytilene--But, good sir,
Whither will you have me? Why do you weep?
It may be you think me an impostor.
No, good faith.
If good King Pericles be.
Thou art a grave and noble counselor,
Most wise in general. Tell me, if thou canst,
What this maid is, or what is like to be,
That thus hath made me weep.
But here's the regent, sir, of Mytilene
Speaks nobly of her.
Her parentage. Being demanded that,
She would sit still and weep.
Give me a gash, put me to present pain,
Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me
And drown me with their sweetness.--O, come hither,
Thou that beget'st him that did thee beget,
Thou that wast born at sea, buried at Tarsus,
And found at sea again!--O, Helicanus,
Down on thy knees! Thank the holy gods as loud
As thunder threatens us. This is Marina.--
What was thy mother's name? Tell me but that,
For truth can never be confirmed enough,
Though doubts did ever sleep.
First, sir, I pray, what is your title?
My drowned queen's name, as in the rest you said
Thou hast been godlike perfect, the heir of kingdoms,
And another life to Pericles thy father.
Is it no more to be your daughter than
To say my mother's name was Thaisa?
Thaisa was my mother, who did end
The minute I began.
Now, blessing on thee! Rise. Thou 'rt my child.--
Give me fresh garments.--Mine own Helicanus,
She is not dead at Tarsus, as she should
Have been, by savage Cleon. She shall tell thee all,
When thou shalt kneel, and justify in knowledge
She is thy very princess. Who is this?
Sir, 'tis the Governor of Mytilene,
Who, hearing of your melancholy state,
Did come to see you.
Give me my robes.--I am wild in my beholding.
Tell Helicanus, my Marina, tell him o'er
Point by point, for yet he seems to doubt,
How sure you are my daughter.--But what music?
The music of the spheres!--List, my Marina.
It is not good to cross him. Give him way.
Music, my lord? I hear--
It nips me unto list'ning, and thick slumber
Hangs upon mine eyes. Let me rest.	
Well, my companion friends, if this but answer
To my just belief, I'll well remember you.
My temple stands in Ephesus. Hie thee thither
And do upon mine altar sacrifice.
There, when my maiden priests are met together,
Before the people all,
Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife.
To mourn thy crosses, with thy daughter's, call,
And give them repetition to the life.
Or perform my bidding, or thou livest in woe;
Do 't, and happy, by my silver bow.
Awake, and tell thy dream.	
Goddess argentine, I will obey thee.--
Helicanus!
Attendants.]
My purpose was for Tarsus, there to strike
The inhospitable Cleon, but I am
For other service first. Toward Ephesus
Turn our blown sails. Eftsoons I'll tell thee why.--
Shall we refresh us, sir, upon your shore,
And give you gold for such provision
As our intents will need?
With all my heart. And when you come ashore,
Were it to woo my daughter, for it seems
You have been noble towards her.
Sir, lend me your arm.
Now our sands are almost run,
More a little, and then dumb.
This my last boon give me--
For such kindness must relieve me--
That you aptly will suppose
What pageantry, what feats, what shows,
What minstrelsy and pretty din
The regent made in Mytilene
To greet the King. So he thrived
That he is promised to be wived
To fair Marina, but in no wise
Till he had done his sacrifice
As Dian bade, whereto being bound,
The interim, pray you, all confound.
In feathered briefness sails are filled,
And wishes fall out as they're willed.
At Ephesus the temple see
Our king and all his company.
That he can hither come so soon
Is by your fancies' thankful doom.
Thaisa; at another door enter Pericles, Marina,
Helicanus, Lysimachus, and Attendants.]
Hail, Dian! To perform thy just command,
Who, frighted from my country, did wed
At Pentapolis the fair Thaisa.
At sea in childbed died she, but brought forth
Wears yet thy silver livery. She at Tarsus
Was nursed with Cleon, who at fourteen years
He sought to murder. But her better stars
Brought her to Mytilene, 'gainst whose shore riding,
Her fortunes brought the maid aboard us, where,
By her own most clear remembrance, she made known
Herself my daughter.
You are, you are--O royal Pericles!
What means the nun? She dies! Help, gentlemen!
If you have told Diana's altar true,
This is your wife.
Upon this coast, I warrant you.
Look to the lady. O, she's but overjoyed.
Early one blustering morn this lady was
Thrown upon this shore. I oped the coffin,
Found there rich jewels, recovered her, and placed her
Here in Diana's temple.
Great sir, they shall be brought you to my house,
Whither I invite you. Look, Thaisa
Is recovered.	
If he be none of mine, my sanctity
Will to my sense bend no licentious ear,
But curb it, spite of seeing.--O, my lord,
Are you not Pericles? Like him you spake,
Like him you are. Did you not name a tempest,
That Thaisa am I, supposed dead
And drowned.
Immortal Dian!
When we with tears parted Pentapolis,
The king my father gave you such a ring.
This, this! No more, you gods! Your present kindness
Makes my past miseries sports. You shall do well
That on the touching of her lips I may
Melt and no more be seen.--O, come, be buried
Leaps to be gone into my mother's bosom.
Look who kneels here, flesh of thy flesh, Thaisa,
Thy burden at the sea, and called Marina
For she was yielded there.
Hail, madam, and my queen.
You have heard me say, when I did fly from Tyre
Can you remember what I called the man?
Embrace him, dear Thaisa. This is he.
Now do I long to hear how you were found,
How possibly preserved, and who to thank,
Besides the gods, for this great miracle.
Through whom the gods have shown their power,
From first to last resolve you.
The gods can have no mortal officer
More like a god than you. Will you deliver
How this dead queen relives?
Beseech you, first go with me to my house,
Where shall be shown you all was found with her,
How she came placed here in the temple,
No needful thing omitted.
Pure Dian, I bless thee for thy vision, and
Will offer night oblations to thee.--Thaisa,
This prince, the fair betrothed of your daughter,
Shall marry her at Pentapolis.--And now this
Makes me look dismal will I clip to form,
And what this fourteen years no razor touched,
To grace thy marriage day I'll beautify.
Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit, sir,
My father's dead.
Heavens make a star of him! Yet there, my queen,
We'll celebrate their nuptials, and ourselves
Will in that kingdom spend our following days.
Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign.--
Lord Cerimon, we do our longing stay
To hear the rest untold. Sir, lead 's the way.
In Antiochus and his daughter you have heard
Of monstrous lust the due and just reward.
In Pericles, his queen, and daughter seen,
Although assailed with fortune fierce and keen,
Virtue preserved from fell destruction's blast,
Led on by heaven, and crowned with joy at last.
In Helicanus may you well descry
In reverend Cerimon there well appears
The worth that learned charity aye wears.
For wicked Cleon and his wife, when fame
Had spread his cursed deed to the honored name
Of Pericles, to rage the city turn,
That him and his they in his palace burn.
The gods for murder seemed so content
To punish, although not done, but meant.
So on your patience evermore attending,
New joy wait on you. Here our play has ending.
Andronicus) and Senators aloft. And then enter, below,
Saturninus and his followers at one door, and
Bassianus and his followers at another door, with
Noble patricians, patrons of my right,
Defend the justice of my cause with arms.
And countrymen, my loving followers,
Plead my successive title with your swords.
That wore the imperial diadem of Rome.
Then let my father's honors live in me,
Nor wrong mine age with this indignity.
Romans, friends, followers, favorers of my right,
If ever Bassianus, Caesar's son,
Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome,
Keep, then, this passage to the Capitol,
And suffer not dishonor to approach
The imperial seat, to virtue consecrate,
To justice, continence, and nobility;
But let desert in pure election shine,
And, Romans, fight for freedom in your choice.
Princes that strive by factions and by friends
Ambitiously for rule and empery,
Know that the people of Rome, for whom we stand
In election for the Roman empery,
Chosen Andronicus, surnamed Pius
For many good and great deserts to Rome.
Lives not this day within the city walls.
He by the Senate is accited home
From weary wars against the barbarous Goths,
That with his sons, a terror to our foes,
Hath yoked a nation strong, trained up in arms.
Ten years are spent since first he undertook
This cause of Rome, and chastised with arms
Our enemies' pride. Five times he hath returned
Bleeding to Rome, bearing his valiant sons
In coffins from the field.
And now at last, laden with honor's spoils,
Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,
Renowned Titus flourishing in arms.
Let us entreat, by honor of his name
Whom worthily you would have now succeed,
And in the Capitol and Senate's right,
Whom you pretend to honor and adore,
That you withdraw you and abate your strength,
Dismiss your followers and, as suitors should,
Plead your deserts in peace and humbleness.
How fair the tribune speaks to calm my thoughts!
Marcus Andronicus, so I do affy
In thy uprightness and integrity,
And so I love and honor thee and thine,
Thy noble brother Titus and his sons,
And her to whom my thoughts are humbled all,
Gracious Lavinia, Rome's rich ornament,
That I will here dismiss my loving friends,
And to my fortunes and the people's favor
Commit my cause in balance to be weighed.
Friends that have been thus forward in my right,
And to the love and favor of my country
Commit myself, my person, and the cause.
Rome, be as just and gracious unto me
As I am confident and kind to thee.
Open the gates and let me in.
Tribunes, and me, a poor competitor.
The Tribunes and Senators exit from the upper stage.]
Romans, make way! The good Andronicus,
Patron of virtue, Rome's best champion,
Successful in the battles that he fights,
With honor and with fortune is returned
From where he circumscribed with his sword
And brought to yoke the enemies of Rome.
Demetrius, with Aaron the Moor, and others as many as
Hail Rome, victorious in thy mourning weeds!
Lo, as the bark that hath discharged his fraught
Returns with precious lading to the bay
From whence at first she weighed her anchorage,
Cometh Andronicus, bound with laurel boughs,
To resalute his country with his tears,
Tears of true joy for his return to Rome.
Thou great defender of this Capitol,
Stand gracious to the rites that we intend.
Romans, of five-and-twenty valiant sons,
Half of the number that King Priam had,
Behold the poor remains alive and dead.
These that survive let Rome reward with love;
These that I bring unto their latest home,
With burial amongst their ancestors.
Here Goths have given me leave to sheathe my sword.
Titus, unkind and careless of thine own,
Why suffer'st thou thy sons unburied yet
To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?
Make way to lay them by their brethren.
There greet in silence, as the dead are wont,
And sleep in peace, slain in your country's wars.
Sweet cell of virtue and nobility,
How many sons hast thou of mine in store
That thou wilt never render to me more?
Give us the proudest prisoner of the Goths,
That we may hew his limbs and on a pile,
Ad manes fratrum, sacrifice his flesh
Before this earthy prison of their bones,
That so the shadows be not unappeased,
Nor we disturbed with prodigies on Earth.
The eldest son of this distressed queen.
Stay, Roman brethren!--Gracious conqueror,
Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed,
And if thy sons were ever dear to thee,
Sufficeth not that we are brought to Rome
To beautify thy triumphs and return
Captive to thee and to thy Roman yoke,
But must my sons be slaughtered in the streets
For valiant doings in their country's cause?
Were piety in thine, it is in these!
Andronicus, stain not thy tomb with blood.
Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods?
Draw near them then in being merciful.
Sweet mercy is nobility's true badge.
Thrice-noble Titus, spare my first-born son.
Patient yourself, madam, and pardon me.
These are their brethren whom your Goths beheld
Alive and dead, and for their brethren slain
Religiously they ask a sacrifice.
To this your son is marked, and die he must,
Away with him, and make a fire straight,
And with our swords upon a pile of wood
Let's hew his limbs till they be clean consumed.
Was never Scythia half so barbarous!
Oppose not Scythia to ambitious Rome!
Alarbus goes to rest and we survive
To tremble under Titus' threat'ning look.
Then, madam, stand resolved, but hope withal
The selfsame gods that armed the Queen of Troy
With opportunity of sharp revenge
Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent
May favor Tamora the Queen of Goths
To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.
See, lord and father, how we have performed
Our Roman rites. Alarbus' limbs are lopped,
And entrails feed the sacrificing fire,
Whose smoke like incense doth perfume the sky.
Remaineth naught but to inter our brethren,
And with loud larums welcome them to Rome.
Let it be so. And let Andronicus
Make this his latest farewell to their souls.
In peace and honor rest you here, my sons,
Rome's readiest champions, repose you here in rest,
Secure from worldly chances and mishaps.
Here lurks no treason, here no envy swells,
Here grow no damned drugs; here are no storms,
No noise, but silence and eternal sleep.
In peace and honor rest you here, my sons.
In peace and honor live Lord Titus long;
My noble lord and father, live in fame.
Lo, at this tomb my tributary tears
And at thy feet I kneel, with tears of joy
Shed on this earth for thy return to Rome.
Whose fortunes Rome's best citizens applaud.
Kind Rome, that hast thus lovingly reserved
The cordial of mine age to glad my heart!--
Lavinia, live, outlive thy father's days
And fame's eternal date, for virtue's praise.
Enter aloft Saturninus, Bassianus, Tribunes, Senators,
Long live Lord Titus, my beloved brother,
Gracious triumpher in the eyes of Rome.
Thanks, gentle tribune, noble brother Marcus.
And welcome, nephews, from successful wars--
You that survive, and you that sleep in fame.
Fair lords, your fortunes are alike in all,
That in your country's service drew your swords;
But safer triumph is this funeral pomp,
That hath aspired to Solon's happiness,
And triumphs over chance in honor's bed.--
Titus Andronicus, the people of Rome,
Whose friend in justice thou hast ever been,
Send thee by me, their tribune and their trust,
This palliament of white and spotless hue,
And name thee in election for the empire
With these our late deceased emperor's sons.
Be candidatus, then, and put it on
And help to set a head on headless Rome.
Than his that shakes for age and feebleness.
Be chosen with proclamations today,
Tomorrow yield up rule, resign my life,
And set abroad new business for you all?
Rome, I have been thy soldier forty years,
And led my country's strength successfully,
And buried one and twenty valiant sons,
Knighted in field, slain manfully in arms,
In right and service of their noble country.
Give me a staff of honor for mine age,
But not a scepter to control the world.
Upright he held it, lords, that held it last.
Titus, thou shalt obtain and ask the empery.
Proud and ambitious tribune, canst thou tell?
Patricians, draw your swords and sheathe them not
Till Saturninus be Rome's emperor.--
Andronicus, would thou were shipped to hell
Rather than rob me of the people's hearts.
Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good
That noble-minded Titus means to thee.
Content thee, prince. I will restore to thee
The people's hearts and wean them from themselves.
Andronicus, I do not flatter thee,
But honor thee, and will do till I die.
My faction if thou strengthen with thy friends,
Of noble minds, is honorable meed.
People of Rome, and people's tribunes here,
Will you bestow them friendly on Andronicus?
To gratify the good Andronicus
And gratulate his safe return to Rome,
The people will accept whom he admits.
Tribunes, I thank you, and this suit I make:
That you create our emperor's eldest son,
Lord Saturnine, whose virtues will, I hope,
Reflect on Rome as Titan's rays on Earth
And ripen justice in this commonweal.
Then, if you will elect by my advice,
Crown him and say "Long live our emperor."
With voices and applause of every sort,
Patricians and plebeians, we create
Lord Saturninus Rome's great emperor,
And say "Long live our Emperor Saturnine."
Titus Andronicus, for thy favors done
To us in our election this day,
And will with deeds requite thy gentleness.
And for an onset, Titus, to advance
Thy name and honorable family,
Lavinia will I make my empress,
Rome's royal mistress, mistress of my heart,
And in the sacred Pantheon her espouse.
Tell me, Andronicus, doth this motion please thee?
It doth, my worthy lord, and in this match
And here in sight of Rome to Saturnine,
King and commander of our commonweal,
The wide world's emperor, do I consecrate
My sword, my chariot, and my prisoners,
Presents well worthy Rome's imperious lord.
Receive them, then, the tribute that I owe,
Mine honor's ensigns humbled at thy feet.
Thanks, noble Titus, father of my life.
How proud I am of thee and of thy gifts
Rome shall record.--And when I do forget
The least of these unspeakable deserts,
Romans, forget your fealty to me.
Now, madam, are you prisoner to an emperor,
To him that for your honor and your state
Will use you nobly, and your followers.
That I would choose, were I to choose anew.--
Clear up, fair queen, that cloudy countenance.
Though chance of war hath wrought this change
Thou com'st not to be made a scorn in Rome.
Princely shall be thy usage every way.
Rest on my word, and let not discontent
Daunt all your hopes. Madam, he comforts you
Can make you greater than the Queen of Goths.--
Lavinia, you are not displeased with this?
Not I, my lord, sith true nobility
Warrants these words in princely courtesy.
Thanks, sweet Lavinia.--Romans, let us go.
Ransomless here we set our prisoners free.
Proclaim our honors, lords, with trump and drum.
Lord Titus, by your leave, this maid is mine.
How, sir? Are you in earnest then, my lord?
Ay, noble Titus, and resolved withal
To do myself this reason and this right.
Suum cuique is our Roman justice.
This prince in justice seizeth but his own.
And that he will and shall, if Lucius live!
Traitors, avaunt! Where is the Emperor's guard?
Treason, my lord. Lavinia is surprised.
Surprised? By whom?
Bear his betrothed from all the world away.
Brothers, help to convey her hence away,
And with my sword I'll keep this door safe.
Quintus, and Martius exit.]
Follow, my lord, and I'll soon bring her back.
Aaron, and Guards exit.]
My lord, you pass not here.
Barr'st me my way in Rome?
My lord, you are unjust, and more than so!
In wrongful quarrel you have slain your son.
Nor thou nor he are any sons of mine.
My sons would never so dishonor me.
Traitor, restore Lavinia to the Emperor.
Dead if you will, but not to be his wife
That is another's lawful promised love.	
No, Titus, no, the Emperor needs her not,
Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock.
Thee never, nor thy traitorous haughty sons,
Confederates all thus to dishonor me.
Was none in Rome to make a stale
But Saturnine? Full well, Andronicus,
Agree these deeds with that proud brag of thine
That said'st I begged the empire at thy hands.
But go thy ways. Go give that changing piece
To him that flourished for her with his sword.
One fit to bandy with thy lawless sons,
To ruffle in the commonwealth of Rome.
These words are razors to my wounded heart.
And therefore, lovely Tamora, Queen of Goths,
That like the stately Phoebe 'mongst her nymphs
Dost overshine the gallant'st dames of Rome,
If thou be pleased with this my sudden choice,
Behold, I choose thee, Tamora, for my bride,
And will create thee Emperess of Rome.
Speak, Queen of Goths, dost thou applaud my
And here I swear by all the Roman gods,
Sith priest and holy water are so near,
And tapers burn so bright, and everything
In readiness for Hymenaeus stand,
Or climb my palace till from forth this place
And here in sight of heaven to Rome I swear,
If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths,
She will a handmaid be to his desires,
Ascend, fair queen, to Pantheon.--Lords, accompany
Your noble emperor and his lovely bride,
Sent by the heavens for Prince Saturnine,
Whose wisdom hath her fortune conquered.
There shall we consummate our spousal rites.
Titus, when wert thou wont to walk alone,
Dishonored thus and challenged of wrongs?
In a bad quarrel slain a virtuous son.
No, foolish tribune, no; no son of mine,
Nor thou, nor these confederates in the deed
That hath dishonored all our family.
Unworthy brother and unworthy sons!
But let us give him burial as becomes,
Give Mutius burial with our brethren.
Traitors, away! He rests not in this tomb.
This monument five hundred years hath stood,
Which I have sumptuously reedified.
Here none but soldiers and Rome's servitors
Repose in fame, none basely slain in brawls.
Bury him where you can. He comes not here.
My lord, this is impiety in you.
My nephew Mutius' deeds do plead for him.
He must be buried with his brethren.
And shall, or him we will accompany.
He that would vouch it in any place but here.
What, would you bury him in my despite?
No, noble Titus, but entreat of thee
To pardon Mutius and to bury him.
Marcus, even thou hast struck upon my crest,
And with these boys mine honor thou hast wounded.
My foes I do repute you every one.
So trouble me no more, but get you gone.
He is not with himself; let us withdraw.
Not I, till Mutius' bones be buried.
Brother, for in that name doth nature plead--
Father, and in that name doth nature speak--
Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed.
Renowned Titus, more than half my soul--
Dear father, soul and substance of us all--
Suffer thy brother Marcus to inter
His noble nephew here in virtue's nest,
That died in honor and Lavinia's cause.
Thou art a Roman; be not barbarous.
The Greeks upon advice did bury Ajax,
That slew himself, and wise Laertes' son
Did graciously plead for his funerals.
Let not young Mutius, then, that was thy joy,
Be barred his entrance here.
The dismall'st day is this that e'er I saw,
To be dishonored by my sons in Rome.
Well, bury him, and bury me the next.
There lie thy bones, sweet Mutius, with thy friends',
Till we with trophies do adorn thy tomb.
No man shed tears for noble Mutius.
He lives in fame, that died in virtue's cause.
My lord, to step out of these dreary dumps,
How comes it that the subtle Queen of Goths
Is of a sudden thus advanced in Rome?
Whether by device or no, the heavens can tell.
Is she not then beholding to the man
That brought her for this high good turn so far?
Yes, and will nobly him remunerate.
Trumpets, at one door. Enter at the other door
Bassianus and Lavinia, with Lucius, Martius, and
Quintus, and others.]
So, Bassianus, you have played your prize.
God give you joy, sir, of your gallant bride.
And you of yours, my lord. I say no more,
Nor wish no less, and so I take my leave.
Traitor, if Rome have law or we have power,
Thou and thy faction shall repent this rape.
My true betrothed love and now my wife?
But let the laws of Rome determine all.
Meanwhile am I possessed of that is mine.
But if we live, we'll be as sharp with you.
My lord, what I have done, as best I may,
Answer I must, and shall do with my life.
Only thus much I give your Grace to know:
By all the duties that I owe to Rome,
This noble gentleman, Lord Titus here,
Is in opinion and in honor wronged,
That in the rescue of Lavinia
With his own hand did slay his youngest son,
In zeal to you, and highly moved to wrath
To be controlled in that he frankly gave.
Receive him then to favor, Saturnine,
That hath expressed himself in all his deeds
Prince Bassianus, leave to plead my deeds.
Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge
How I have loved and honored Saturnine.	
My worthy lord, if ever Tamora
Were gracious in those princely eyes of thine,
Then hear me speak indifferently for all,
And at my suit, sweet, pardon what is past.
What, madam, be dishonored openly,
And basely put it up without revenge?
Not so, my lord; the gods of Rome forfend
But on mine honor dare I undertake
For good Lord Titus' innocence in all,
Whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs.
Then at my suit look graciously on him.
Lose not so noble a friend on vain suppose,
Nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart.
Dissemble all your griefs and discontents.
You are but newly planted in your throne.
Lest, then, the people, and patricians too,
Upon a just survey take Titus' part
And so supplant you for ingratitude,
Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin.
Yield at entreats, and then let me alone.
And raze their faction and their family,
The cruel father and his traitorous sons,
To whom I sued for my dear son's life,
And make them know what 'tis to let a queen
Kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain.
Andronicus.--
Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart
That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.
Rise, Titus, rise. My empress hath prevailed.
These words, these looks, infuse new life in me.
Titus, I am incorporate in Rome,
And must advise the Emperor for his good.
This day all quarrels die, Andronicus.--
And let it be mine honor, good my lord,
That I have reconciled your friends and you.--
For you, Prince Bassianus, I have passed
My word and promise to the Emperor
That you will be more mild and tractable.--
And fear not, lords--and you, Lavinia.
By my advice, all humbled on your knees,
You shall ask pardon of his Majesty.
We do, and vow to heaven and to his Highness
That what we did was mildly as we might,
Tend'ring our sister's honor and our own.
That on mine honor here do I protest.
Away, and talk not; trouble us no more.
Nay, nay, sweet emperor, we must all be friends.
The tribune and his nephews kneel for grace.
Marcus, for thy sake, and thy brother's here,
And at my lovely Tamora's entreats,
Stand up.	
Lavinia, though you left me like a churl,
Come, if the Emperor's court can feast two brides,
You are my guest, Lavinia, and your friends.--
This day shall be a love-day, Tamora.
Tomorrow, an it please your Majesty
To hunt the panther and the hart with me,
With horn and hound we'll give your Grace bonjour.
Be it so, Titus, and gramercy too.
Now climbeth Tamora Olympus' top,
Safe out of Fortune's shot, and sits aloft,
Secure of thunder's crack or lightning flash,
Advanced above pale Envy's threat'ning reach.
As when the golden sun salutes the morn
And, having gilt the ocean with his beams,
Gallops the zodiac in his glistering coach
And overlooks the highest-peering hills,
So Tamora.
Upon her wit doth earthly honor wait,
And virtue stoops and trembles at her frown.
Then, Aaron, arm thy heart and fit thy thoughts
To mount aloft with thy imperial mistress,
And mount her pitch whom thou in triumph long
Hast prisoner held, fettered in amorous chains
And faster bound to Aaron's charming eyes
Than is Prometheus tied to Caucasus.
Away with slavish weeds and servile thoughts!
To wait upon this new-made emperess.
To wait, said I? To wanton with this queen,
This goddess, this Semiramis, this nymph,
This siren that will charm Rome's Saturnine
And see his shipwrack and his commonweal's.
Holla! What storm is this?
Chiron, thy years wants wit, thy wits wants edge
And manners, to intrude where I am graced,
And may, for aught thou knowest, affected be.
Demetrius, thou dost overween in all,
And so in this, to bear me down with braves.
Makes me less gracious or thee more fortunate.
To serve and to deserve my mistress' grace,
And that my sword upon thee shall approve
And plead my passions for Lavinia's love.
Clubs, clubs! These lovers will not keep the peace.
Why, boy, although our mother, unadvised,
Gave you a dancing rapier by your side,
Are you so desperate grown to threat your friends?
Go to. Have your lath glued within your sheath
Till you know better how to handle it.
Meanwhile, sir, with the little skill I have,
Full well shalt thou perceive how much I dare.
Ay, boy, grow you so brave?	
So near the Emperor's palace dare you draw
And maintain such a quarrel openly?
Full well I wot the ground of all this grudge.
The cause were known to them it most concerns,
Nor would your noble mother for much more
Be so dishonored in the court of Rome.
For shame, put up.
My rapier in his bosom, and withal
Thrust those reproachful speeches down his throat
That he hath breathed in my dishonor here.
For that I am prepared and full resolved,
Foul-spoken coward, that thund'rest with thy tongue
And with thy weapon nothing dar'st perform.
Now by the gods that warlike Goths adore,
This petty brabble will undo us all.
Why, lords, and think you not how dangerous
It is to jet upon a prince's right?
What, is Lavinia then become so loose
Or Bassianus so degenerate
That for her love such quarrels may be broached
Without controlment, justice, or revenge?
Young lords, beware! And should the Empress know
This discord's ground, the music would not please.
Youngling, learn thou to make some meaner choice.
Lavinia is thine elder brother's hope.
Why, are you mad? Or know you not in Rome
How furious and impatient they be,
And cannot brook competitors in love?
By this device.
Would I propose to achieve her whom I love.
To achieve her how?
She is a woman, therefore may be wooed;
She is a woman, therefore may be won;
She is Lavinia, therefore must be loved.
What, man, more water glideth by the mill
Than wots the miller of, and easy it is
Of a cut loaf to steal a shive, we know.
Though Bassianus be the Emperor's brother,
Better than he have worn Vulcan's badge.
Ay, and as good as Saturninus may.
Then why should he despair that knows to court it
With words, fair looks, and liberality?
What, hast not thou full often struck a doe
And borne her cleanly by the keeper's nose?
Why, then, it seems some certain snatch or so
Would serve your turns.
Then should not we be tired with this ado.
Why, hark you, hark you! And are you such fools
To square for this? Would it offend you then
That both should speed?
Faith, not me.
For shame, be friends, and join for that you jar.
That you affect, and so must you resolve
That what you cannot as you would achieve,
You must perforce accomplish as you may.
Take this of me: Lucrece was not more chaste
Than this Lavinia, Bassianus' love.
Must we pursue, and I have found the path.
My lords, a solemn hunting is in hand;
There will the lovely Roman ladies troop.
The forest walks are wide and spacious,
And many unfrequented plots there are,
Fitted by kind for rape and villainy.
Single you thither then this dainty doe,
And strike her home by force, if not by words.
This way, or not at all, stand you in hope.
Come, come, our empress, with her sacred wit
To villainy and vengeance consecrate,
Will we acquaint withal what we intend,
And she shall file our engines with advice
That will not suffer you to square yourselves,
But to your wishes' height advance you both.
The Emperor's court is like the house of Fame,
The palace full of tongues, of eyes, and ears;
The woods are ruthless, dreadful, deaf, and dull.
There speak and strike, brave boys, and take your
There serve your lust, shadowed from heaven's eye,
And revel in Lavinia's treasury.
Thy counsel, lad, smells of no cowardice.
Sit fas aut nefas, till I find the stream
To cool this heat, a charm to calm these fits,
Per Stygia, per manes vehor.
Marcus, making a noise with hounds and horns.]
The hunt is up, the moon is bright and gray,
The fields are fragrant, and the woods are green.
Uncouple here, and let us make a bay
And wake the Emperor and his lovely bride,
And rouse the Prince, and ring a hunter's peal,
That all the court may echo with the noise.
Sons, let it be your charge, as it is ours,
To attend the Emperor's person carefully.
But dawning day new comfort hath inspired.
Demetrius, and their Attendants.]
Many good morrows to your Majesty;--
Madam, to you as many, and as good.--
And you have rung it lustily, my lords--
Somewhat too early for new-married ladies.
Lavinia, how say you?
Come on, then. Horse and chariots let us have,
And to our sport.  Madam, now shall
Our Roman hunting.
Will rouse the proudest panther in the chase
And climb the highest promontory top.
And I have horse will follow where the game
Makes way and runs like swallows o'er the plain.
Chiron, we hunt not, we, with horse nor hound,
But hope to pluck a dainty doe to ground.
He that had wit would think that I had none,
To bury so much gold under a tree
And never after to inherit it.
Let him that thinks of me so abjectly
Know that this gold must coin a stratagem
Which, cunningly effected, will beget
And so repose, sweet gold, for their unrest
That have their alms out of the Empress' chest.
My lovely Aaron, wherefore look'st thou sad,
When everything doth make a gleeful boast?
The birds chant melody on every bush,
The snakes lies rolled in the cheerful sun,
The green leaves quiver with the cooling wind
And make a checkered shadow on the ground.
Under their sweet shade, Aaron, let us sit,
And whilst the babbling echo mocks the hounds,
Replying shrilly to the well-tuned horns,
As if a double hunt were heard at once,
Let us sit down and mark their yellowing noise.
And after conflict such as was supposed
The wand'ring prince and Dido once enjoyed
When with a happy storm they were surprised,
And curtained with a counsel-keeping cave,
We may, each wreathed in the other's arms,
Our pastimes done, possess a golden slumber,
Whiles hounds and horns and sweet melodious birds
Be unto us as is a nurse's song
Of lullaby to bring her babe asleep.
Madam, though Venus govern your desires,
Saturn is dominator over mine.
What signifies my deadly standing eye,
My silence, and my cloudy melancholy,
My fleece of woolly hair that now uncurls
Even as an adder when she doth unroll
To do some fatal execution?
No, madam, these are no venereal signs.
Vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand,
Blood and revenge are hammering in my head.
Hark, Tamora, the empress of my soul,
Which never hopes more heaven than rests in thee,
This is the day of doom for Bassianus.
His Philomel must lose her tongue today,
Thy sons make pillage of her chastity
And wash their hands in Bassianus' blood.
Seest thou this letter? Take it up, I pray thee,
And give the King this fatal-plotted scroll.
Now, question me no more. We are espied.
Here comes a parcel of our hopeful booty,
Which dreads not yet their lives' destruction.
Ah, my sweet Moor, sweeter to me than life!
No more, great empress. Bassianus comes.
Be cross with him, and I'll go fetch thy sons
To back thy quarrels, whatsoe'er they be.
Who have we here? Rome's royal empress,
Unfurnished of her well-beseeming troop?
Or is it Dian, habited like her,
Who hath abandoned her holy groves
To see the general hunting in this forest?
Saucy controller of my private steps,
Had I the power that some say Dian had,
Thy temples should be planted presently
With horns, as was Acteon's, and the hounds
Should drive upon thy new-transformed limbs,
Unmannerly intruder as thou art.
Under your patience, gentle empress,
And to be doubted that your Moor and you
Are singled forth to try experiments.
Jove shield your husband from his hounds today!
Believe me, queen, your swarthy Cimmerian
Doth make your honor of his body's hue,
Spotted, detested, and abominable.
Why are you sequestered from all your train,
Dismounted from your snow-white goodly steed,
And wandered hither to an obscure plot,
Accompanied but with a barbarous Moor,
If foul desire had not conducted you?
And being intercepted in your sport,
Great reason that my noble lord be rated
For sauciness.--I pray you, let us hence,
And let her joy her raven-colored love.
This valley fits the purpose passing well.
The King my brother shall have notice of this.
Ay, for these slips have made him noted long.
Good king to be so mightily abused!
Why, I have patience to endure all this.
How now, dear sovereign and our gracious mother,
Why doth your Highness look so pale and wan?
Have I not reason, think you, to look pale?
These two have ticed me hither to this place,
The trees, though summer, yet forlorn and lean,
Overcome with moss and baleful mistletoe.
Here never shines the sun, here nothing breeds,
Unless the nightly owl or fatal raven.
And when they showed me this abhorred pit,
They told me, here at dead time of the night
Ten thousand swelling toads, as many urchins,
Would make such fearful and confused cries
As any mortal body hearing it
Should straight fall mad, or else die suddenly.
No sooner had they told this hellish tale
But straight they told me they would bind me here
Unto the body of a dismal yew
And leave me to this miserable death.
And then they called me foul adulteress,
Lascivious Goth, and all the bitterest terms
That ever ear did hear to such effect.
And had you not by wondrous fortune come,
This vengeance on me had they executed.
Revenge it as you love your mother's life,
Or be you not henceforth called my children.
This is a witness that I am thy son.
And this for me, struck home to show my strength.
Ay, come, Semiramis, nay, barbarous Tamora,
For no name fits thy nature but thy own!
Give me the poniard! You shall know, my boys,
Your mother's hand shall right your mother's wrong.
Stay, madam, here is more belongs to her.
First thrash the corn, then after burn the straw.
This minion stood upon her chastity,
Upon her nuptial vow, her loyalty,
And with that painted hope braves your mightiness;
And shall she carry this unto her grave?
And if she do, I would I were an eunuch!
Drag hence her husband to some secret hole,
And make his dead trunk pillow to our lust.
But when you have the honey you desire,
Let not this wasp outlive, us both to sting.
Come, mistress, now perforce we will enjoy
That nice-preserved honesty of yours.
Sweet lords, entreat her hear me but a word.
Listen, fair madam. Let it be your glory
To see her tears, but be your heart to them
As unrelenting flint to drops of rain.
When did the tiger's young ones teach the dam?
The milk thou suck'st from her did turn to marble.
Even at thy teat thou hadst thy tyranny.
Yet every mother breeds not sons alike.
What, wouldst thou have me prove myself a bastard?
Yet have I heard--O, could I find it now!--
The lion, moved with pity, did endure
To have his princely paws pared all away.
Some say that ravens foster forlorn children,
The whilst their own birds famish in their nests.
Nothing so kind, but something pitiful.
That gave thee life when well he might have slain thee,
Be not obdurate; open thy deaf ears.
Hadst thou in person ne'er offended me,
Even for his sake am I pitiless.--
Remember, boys, I poured forth tears in vain
To save your brother from the sacrifice,
But fierce Andronicus would not relent.
Therefore away with her, and use her as you will;
The worse to her, the better loved of me.
And with thine own hands kill me in this place!
For 'tis not life that I have begged so long;
Poor I was slain when Bassianus died.
What begg'st thou, then? Fond woman, let me go!
That womanhood denies my tongue to tell.
And tumble me into some loathsome pit
Where never man's eye may behold my body.
Do this, and be a charitable murderer.
So should I rob my sweet sons of their fee.
No, let them satisfy their lust on thee.
Away, for thou hast stayed us here too long!
No grace, no womanhood? Ah, beastly creature,
The blot and enemy to our general name,
Confusion fall--
Nay, then, I'll stop your mouth.--Bring thou her
This is the hole where Aaron bid us hide him.
Farewell, my sons. See that you make her sure.
Ne'er let my heart know merry cheer indeed
Till all the Andronici be made away.
Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moor,
And let my spleenful sons this trull deflower.
Quintus and Martius.]
Come on, my lords, the better foot before.
Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit
Where I espied the panther fast asleep.
My sight is very dull, whate'er it bodes.
And mine, I promise you. Were it not for shame,
Well could I leave our sport to sleep awhile.
What, art thou fallen? What subtle hole is this,
Whose mouth is covered with rude-growing briers
Upon whose leaves are drops of new-shed blood
As fresh as morning dew distilled on flowers?
Speak, brother! Hast thou hurt thee with the fall?
That ever eye with sight made heart lament!
Now will I fetch the King to find them here,
That he thereby may have a likely guess
How these were they that made away his brother.
Why dost not comfort me and help me out
From this unhallowed and bloodstained hole?
My heart suspects more than mine eye can see.
To prove thou hast a true-divining heart,
Aaron and thou look down into this den
And see a fearful sight of blood and death.
Aaron is gone, and my compassionate heart
Will not permit mine eyes once to behold
The thing whereat it trembles by surmise.
Was I a child to fear I know not what.
Lord Bassianus lies berayed in blood,
All on a heap, like to a slaughtered lamb,
In this detested, dark, blood-drinking pit.
If it be dark, how dost thou know 'tis he?
Upon his bloody finger he doth wear
Which like a taper in some monument
Doth shine upon the dead man's earthy cheeks
And shows the ragged entrails of this pit.
So pale did shine the moon on Pyramus
When he by night lay bathed in maiden blood.
If fear hath made thee faint as me it hath--
Out of this fell devouring receptacle,
As hateful as Cocytus' misty mouth.
Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee out,
Or, wanting strength to do thee so much good,
Of this deep pit, poor Bassianus' grave.
Nor I no strength to climb without thy help.
Thy hand once more. I will not loose again
Till thou art here aloft or I below.
Thou canst not come to me. I come to thee.
Along with me! I'll see what hole is here
And what he is that now is leapt into it.--
Say, who art thou that lately didst descend
Into this gaping hollow of the earth?
The unhappy sons of old Andronicus,
Brought hither in a most unlucky hour
To find thy brother Bassianus dead.
My brother dead! I know thou dost but jest.
He and his lady both are at the lodge
Upon the north side of this pleasant chase.
We know not where you left them all alive,
But, out alas, here have we found him dead.
Here, Tamora, though grieved with killing grief.
Where is thy brother Bassianus?
Now to the bottom dost thou search my wound.
Poor Bassianus here lies murdered.
Then all too late I bring this fatal writ,
The complot of this timeless tragedy,
And wonder greatly that man's face can fold
In pleasing smiles such murderous tyranny.
An if we miss to meet him handsomely,
Sweet huntsman--Bassianus 'tis we mean--
Do thou so much as dig the grave for him;
Thou know'st our meaning. Look for thy reward
Among the nettles at the elder tree
Which overshades the mouth of that same pit
Where we decreed to bury Bassianus.
Do this, and purchase us thy lasting friends.
This is the pit, and this the elder tree.--
Look, sirs, if you can find the huntsman out
That should have murdered Bassianus here.
My gracious lord, here is the bag of gold.
Two of thy whelps, fell curs of bloody kind,
Have here bereft my brother of his life.--
Sirs, drag them from the pit unto the prison.
There let them bide until we have devised
Some never-heard-of torturing pain for them.
What, are they in this pit? O wondrous thing!
How easily murder is discovered.
High Emperor, upon my feeble knee
That this fell fault of my accursed sons--
Accursed if the faults be proved in them--
If it be proved! You see it is apparent.
Who found this letter? Tamora, was it you?
Andronicus himself did take it up.
For by my father's reverend tomb I vow
They shall be ready at your Highness' will
To answer their suspicion with their lives.
Thou shalt not bail them. See thou follow me.--
Some bring the murdered body, some the murderers.
Let them not speak a word. The guilt is plain.
For, by my soul, were there worse end than death,
That end upon them should be executed.
Andronicus, I will entreat the King.
Fear not thy sons; they shall do well enough.
Come, Lucius, come. Stay not to talk with them.
Quintus and bearing the body of Bassianus.]
So, now go tell, an if thy tongue can speak,
Who 'twas that cut thy tongue and ravished thee.
Write down thy mind; bewray thy meaning so,
An if thy stumps will let thee play the scribe.
See how with signs and tokens she can scrowl.
Go home. Call for sweet water; wash thy hands.
She hath no tongue to call, nor hands to wash;
And so let's leave her to her silent walks.
An 'twere my cause, I should go hang myself.
If thou hadst hands to help thee knit the cord.
Who is this? My niece, that flies away so fast?--
Cousin, a word. Where is your husband?
If I do dream, would all my wealth would wake me.
If I do wake, some planet strike me down
That I may slumber an eternal sleep.
Speak, gentle niece. What stern ungentle hands
Hath lopped and hewed and made thy body bare
Of her two branches, those sweet ornaments
Whose circling shadows kings have sought to sleep in,
And might not gain so great a happiness
As half thy love? Why dost not speak to me?
Alas, a crimson river of warm blood,
Like to a bubbling fountain stirred with wind,
Doth rise and fall between thy rosed lips,
Coming and going with thy honey breath.
But sure some Tereus hath deflowered thee,
And lest thou shouldst detect him cut thy tongue.
Ah, now thou turn'st away thy face for shame,
And notwithstanding all this loss of blood,
As from a conduit with three issuing spouts,
Yet do thy cheeks look red as Titan's face,
Blushing to be encountered with a cloud.
Shall I speak for thee, shall I say 'tis so?
That I might rail at him to ease my mind.
Sorrow concealed, like an oven stopped,
Doth burn the heart to cinders where it is.
Fair Philomela, why she but lost her tongue,
And in a tedious sampler sewed her mind;
But, lovely niece, that mean is cut from thee.
And he hath cut those pretty fingers off
That could have better sewed than Philomel.
Tremble like aspen leaves upon a lute
And make the silken strings delight to kiss them,
He would not then have touched them for his life.
Or had he heard the heavenly harmony
Which that sweet tongue hath made,
He would have dropped his knife and fell asleep,
As Cerberus at the Thracian poet's feet.
Come, let us go and make thy father blind,
For such a sight will blind a father's eye.
One hour's storm will drown the fragrant meads;
What will whole months of tears thy father's eyes?
Do not draw back, for we will mourn with thee.
Hear me, grave fathers; noble tribunes, stay.
For pity of mine age, whose youth was spent
In dangerous wars whilst you securely slept;
For all my blood in Rome's great quarrel shed,
For all the frosty nights that I have watched,
And for these bitter tears which now you see,
Filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks,
Be pitiful to my condemned sons,
Whose souls is not corrupted as 'tis thought.
For two-and-twenty sons I never wept
Because they died in honor's lofty bed.
For these, tribunes, in the dust I write
My heart's deep languor and my soul's sad tears.
Let my tears stanch the earth's dry appetite.
My sons' sweet blood will make it shame and blush.
That shall distil from these two ancient ruins
Than youthful April shall with all his showers.
In summer's drought I'll drop upon thee still;
In winter with warm tears I'll melt the snow
And keep eternal springtime on thy face,
So thou refuse to drink my dear sons' blood.
Unbind my sons, reverse the doom of death,
And let me say, that never wept before,
My tears are now prevailing orators.
The Tribunes hear you not; no man is by,
And you recount your sorrows to a stone.
Ah, Lucius, for thy brothers let me plead.--
Grave tribunes, once more I entreat of you--
My gracious lord, no tribune hears you speak.
Why, 'tis no matter, man. If they did hear,
They would not mark me; if they did mark,
They would not pity me. Yet plead I must,
And bootless unto them.
Therefore I tell my sorrows to the stones,
Who, though they cannot answer my distress,
Yet in some sort they are better than the Tribunes,
For that they will not intercept my tale.
When I do weep, they humbly at my feet
Receive my tears and seem to weep with me,
And were they but attired in grave weeds,
Rome could afford no tribunes like to these.
And tribunes with their tongues doom men to death.
But wherefore stand'st thou with thy weapon drawn?
To rescue my two brothers from their death,
For which attempt the Judges have pronounced
My everlasting doom of banishment.
Why, foolish Lucius, dost thou not perceive
That Rome is but a wilderness of tigers?
Tigers must prey, and Rome affords no prey
But me and mine. How happy art thou then
From these devourers to be banished.
But who comes with our brother Marcus here?
Titus, prepare thy aged eyes to weep,
Or, if not so, thy noble heart to break.
Will it consume me? Let me see it, then.
This was thy daughter.
Faint-hearted boy, arise and look upon her.--
Speak, Lavinia. What accursed hand
Hath made thee handless in thy father's sight?
What fool hath added water to the sea
Or brought a faggot to bright-burning Troy?
My grief was at the height before thou cam'st,
And now like Nilus it disdaineth bounds.--
Give me a sword. I'll chop off my hands too,
For they have fought for Rome and all in vain;
And they have nursed this woe in feeding life;
In bootless prayer have they been held up,
And they have served me to effectless use.
Now all the service I require of them
Is that the one will help to cut the other.--
For hands to do Rome service is but vain.
Speak, gentle sister. Who hath martyred thee?
That blabbed them with such pleasing eloquence,
Is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage
Where, like a sweet melodious bird, it sung
Sweet varied notes, enchanting every ear.
Seeking to hide herself as doth the deer
That hath received some unrecuring wound.
It was my dear, and he that wounded her
Hath hurt me more than had he killed me dead.
For now I stand as one upon a rock,
Environed with a wilderness of sea,
Who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave,
Expecting ever when some envious surge
Will in his brinish bowels swallow him.
This way to death my wretched sons are gone;
Here stands my other son a banished man,
And here my brother, weeping at my woes.
But that which gives my soul the greatest spurn
Is dear Lavinia, dearer than my soul.
Had I but seen thy picture in this plight
It would have madded me. What shall I do,
Now I behold thy lively body so?
Thou hast no hands to wipe away thy tears,
Nor tongue to tell me who hath martyred thee.
Thy husband he is dead, and for his death
Thy brothers are condemned, and dead by this.--
Look, Marcus!--Ah, son Lucius, look on her!
When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears
Stood on her cheeks as doth the honeydew
Upon a gathered lily almost withered.
Perchance she weeps because they killed her husband,
Perchance because she knows them innocent.
If they did kill thy husband, then be joyful,
Because the law hath ta'en revenge on them.--
No, no, they would not do so foul a deed.
Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.--
Gentle Lavinia, let me kiss thy lips,
Or make some sign how I may do thee ease.
Shall thy good uncle and thy brother Lucius
And thou and I sit round about some fountain,
Looking all downwards to behold our cheeks,
How they are stained like meadows yet not dry
With miry slime left on them by a flood?
And in the fountain shall we gaze so long
Till the fresh taste be taken from that clearness
And made a brine pit with our bitter tears?
Or shall we cut away our hands like thine?
Or shall we bite our tongues and in dumb shows
Pass the remainder of our hateful days?
What shall we do? Let us that have our tongues
Plot some device of further misery
To make us wondered at in time to come.
Sweet father, cease your tears, for at your grief
See how my wretched sister sobs and weeps.
Patience, dear niece.--Good Titus, dry thine eyes.
Ah, Marcus, Marcus! Brother, well I wot
Thy napkin cannot drink a tear of mine,
For thou, poor man, hast drowned it with thine own.
Ah, my Lavinia, I will wipe thy cheeks.
Mark, Marcus, mark. I understand her signs.
Had she a tongue to speak, now would she say
That to her brother which I said to thee.
His napkin, with his true tears all bewet,
Can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks.
As far from help as limbo is from bliss.
Titus Andronicus, my lord the Emperor
Sends thee this word, that if thou love thy sons,
Let Marcus, Lucius, or thyself, old Titus,
Or any one of you, chop off your hand
And send it to the King; he for the same
Will send thee hither both thy sons alive,
And that shall be the ransom for their fault.
Did ever raven sing so like a lark,
That gives sweet tidings of the sun's uprise?
With all my heart I'll send the Emperor my hand.
Good Aaron, wilt thou help to chop it off?
Stay, father, for that noble hand of thine,
That hath thrown down so many enemies,
Shall not be sent. My hand will serve the turn.
My youth can better spare my blood than you,
And therefore mine shall save my brothers' lives.
Which of your hands hath not defended Rome
And reared aloft the bloody battleax,
Writing destruction on the enemy's castle?
My hand hath been but idle; let it serve
To ransom my two nephews from their death.
Then have I kept it to a worthy end.
Nay, come, agree whose hand shall go along,
For fear they die before their pardon come.
My hand shall go.
Sirs, strive no more. Such withered herbs as these
Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine.
Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son,
Let me redeem my brothers both from death.
And for our father's sake and mother's care,
Now let me show a brother's love to thee.
Agree between you. I will spare my hand.
Come hither, Aaron. I'll deceive them both.
Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine.
If that be called deceit, I will be honest
And never whilst I live deceive men so.
But I'll deceive you in another sort,
And that you'll say ere half an hour pass.
Now stay your strife. What shall be is dispatched.--
Good Aaron, give his Majesty my hand.
Tell him it was a hand that warded him
From thousand dangers. Bid him bury it.
More hath it merited; that let it have.
As for my sons, say I account of them
As jewels purchased at an easy price,
And yet dear, too, because I bought mine own.
Look by and by to have thy sons with thee.
Doth fat me with the very thoughts of it!
Let fools do good and fair men call for grace;
Aaron will have his soul black like his face.
And bow this feeble ruin to the earth.	
If any power pities wretched tears,
To that I call.  What, wouldst thou
Do, then, dear heart, for heaven shall hear our
Or with our sighs we'll breathe the welkin dim
And stain the sun with fog, as sometime clouds
When they do hug him in their melting bosoms.
And do not break into these deep extremes.
Is not my sorrow deep, having no bottom?
Then be my passions bottomless with them.
But yet let reason govern thy lament.
If there were reason for these miseries,
Then into limits could I bind my woes.
When heaven doth weep, doth not the Earth o'erflow?
If the winds rage, doth not the sea wax mad,
Threat'ning the welkin with his big-swoll'n face?
And wilt thou have a reason for this coil?
She is the weeping welkin, I the Earth.
Then must my sea be moved with her sighs;
Then must my Earth with her continual tears
Become a deluge, overflowed and drowned,
Forwhy my bowels cannot hide her woes
But like a drunkard must I vomit them.
Then give me leave, for losers will have leave
To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues.
Worthy Andronicus, ill art thou repaid
For that good hand thou sent'st the Emperor.
Here are the heads of thy two noble sons,
And here's thy hand in scorn to thee sent back.
Thy grief their sports, thy resolution mocked,
That woe is me to think upon thy woes
More than remembrance of my father's death.
Now let hot Etna cool in Sicily,
And be my heart an everburning hell!
These miseries are more than may be borne.
To weep with them that weep doth ease some deal,
But sorrow flouted at is double death.
Ah, that this sight should make so deep a wound
And yet detested life not shrink thereat!
That ever death should let life bear his name,
Where life hath no more interest but to breathe.
Alas, poor heart, that kiss is comfortless
As frozen water to a starved snake.
When will this fearful slumber have an end?
Now farewell, flatt'ry; die, Andronicus.
Thou dost not slumber. See thy two sons' heads,
Thy warlike hand, thy mangled daughter here,
Thy other banished son with this dear sight
Struck pale and bloodless; and thy brother, I,
Even like a stony image cold and numb.
Ah, now no more will I control thy griefs.
Rent off thy silver hair, thy other hand,
Gnawing with thy teeth, and be this dismal sight
The closing up of our most wretched eyes.
Now is a time to storm. Why art thou still?
Why dost thou laugh? It fits not with this hour.
Why, I have not another tear to shed.
Besides, this sorrow is an enemy
And would usurp upon my wat'ry eyes
And make them blind with tributary tears.
Then which way shall I find Revenge's cave?
For these two heads do seem to speak to me
And threat me I shall never come to bliss
Till all these mischiefs be returned again
Even in their throats that hath committed them.
Come, let me see what task I have to do.
You heavy people, circle me about
That I may turn me to each one of you
And swear unto my soul to right your wrongs.
The vow is made. Come, brother, take a head,
And in this hand the other will I bear.--
And, Lavinia, thou shalt be employed in these arms.
Bear thou my hand, sweet wench, between thy
As for thee, boy, go get thee from my sight.
Thou art an exile, and thou must not stay.
Hie to the Goths and raise an army there.
And if you love me, as I think you do,
Let's kiss and part, for we have much to do.
Farewell, Andronicus, my noble father,
The woefull'st man that ever lived in Rome.
Farewell, proud Rome, till Lucius come again.
He loves his pledges dearer than his life.
Farewell, Lavinia, my noble sister.
But now nor Lucius nor Lavinia lives
But in oblivion and hateful griefs.
If Lucius live he will requite your wrongs
And make proud Saturnine and his empress
Beg at the gates like Tarquin and his queen.
Now will I to the Goths and raise a power
To be revenged on Rome and Saturnine.
So, so. Now sit, and look you eat no more
Than will preserve just so much strength in us
As will revenge these bitter woes of ours.
Marcus, unknit that sorrow-wreathen knot.
Thy niece and I, poor creatures, want our hands
And cannot passionate our tenfold grief
With folded arms. This poor right hand of mine
Is left to tyrannize upon my breast,
Who, when my heart, all mad with misery,
Beats in this hollow prison of my flesh,
Then thus I thump it down.--
Thou map of woe, that thus dost talk in signs,
When thy poor heart beats with outrageous beating,
Thou canst not strike it thus to make it still.
Wound it with sighing, girl, kill it with groans;
Or get some little knife between thy teeth
And just against thy heart make thou a hole,
That all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall
May run into that sink and, soaking in,
Drown the lamenting fool in sea-salt tears.
Fie, brother, fie! Teach her not thus to lay
Such violent hands upon her tender life.
How now! Has sorrow made thee dote already?
Why, Marcus, no man should be mad but I.
What violent hands can she lay on her life?
Ah, wherefore dost thou urge the name of hands,
To bid Aeneas tell the tale twice o'er
How Troy was burnt and he made miserable?
Lest we remember still that we have none.--
Fie, fie, how franticly I square my talk,
As if we should forget we had no hands
If Marcus did not name the word of hands!
Come, let's fall to, and, gentle girl, eat this.
Here is no drink!--Hark, Marcus, what she says.
She says she drinks no other drink but tears
Brewed with her sorrow, mashed upon her cheeks.--
Speechless complainer, I will learn thy thought.
In thy dumb action will I be as perfect
As begging hermits in their holy prayers.
Thou shalt not sigh, nor hold thy stumps to heaven,
Nor wink, nor nod, nor kneel, nor make a sign,
But I of these will wrest an alphabet
And by still practice learn to know thy meaning.
Good grandsire, leave these bitter deep laments.
Make my aunt merry with some pleasing tale.
Alas, the tender boy, in passion moved,
Doth weep to see his grandsire's heaviness.
Peace, tender sapling. Thou art made of tears,
And tears will quickly melt thy life away.
What dost thou strike at, Marcus, with thy knife?
At that that I have killed, my lord, a fly.
Out on thee, murderer! Thou kill'st my heart.
Mine eyes are cloyed with view of tyranny;
Becomes not Titus' brother. Get thee gone.
Alas, my lord, I have but killed a fly.
How would he hang his slender gilded wings
And buzz lamenting doings in the air!
Poor harmless fly,
That, with his pretty buzzing melody,
Came here to make us merry! And thou hast killed
Pardon me, sir. It was a black, ill-favored fly,
Like to the Empress' Moor. Therefore I killed him.
Then pardon me for reprehending thee,
For thou hast done a charitable deed.
Give me thy knife. I will insult on him,
Flattering myself as if it were the Moor
Come hither purposely to poison me.
There's for thyself, and that's for Tamora.
Ah, sirrah!
Yet I think we are not brought so low
But that between us we can kill a fly
That comes in likeness of a coal-black Moor.
Alas, poor man, grief has so wrought on him
He takes false shadows for true substances.
Come, take away.--Lavinia, go with me.
Sad stories chanced in the times of old.--
Come, boy, and go with me. Thy sight is young,
And thou shalt read when mine begin to dazzle.
Enter Titus and Marcus.]
Help, grandsire, help! My aunt Lavinia
Follows me everywhere, I know not why.--
Good uncle Marcus, see how swift she comes!--
Alas, sweet aunt, I know not what you mean.
Stand by me, Lucius. Do not fear thine aunt.
She loves thee, boy, too well to do thee harm.
Ay, when my father was in Rome she did.
What means my niece Lavinia by these signs?
Fear her not, Lucius. Somewhat doth she mean.
See, Lucius, see, how much she makes of thee.
Somewhither would she have thee go with her.
Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care
Read to her sons than she hath read to thee
Sweet poetry and Tully's Orator.
Canst thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus?
My lord, I know not, I, nor can I guess,
Unless some fit or frenzy do possess her;
For I have heard my grandsire say full oft,
Extremity of griefs would make men mad,
And I have read that Hecuba of Troy
Ran mad for sorrow. That made me to fear,
Although, my lord, I know my noble aunt
Loves me as dear as e'er my mother did,
And would not but in fury fright my youth,
Which made me down to throw my books and fly,
Causeless, perhaps.--But pardon me, sweet aunt.
And, madam, if my uncle Marcus go,
How now, Lavinia?--Marcus, what means this?
Some book there is that she desires to see.--
Which is it, girl, of these?--Open them, boy.--
Come and take choice of all my library,
And so beguile thy sorrow till the heavens
Reveal the damned contriver of this deed.--
Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus?
Confederate in the fact. Ay, more there was,
Or else to heaven she heaves them for revenge.
Lucius, what book is that she tosseth so?
Grandsire, 'tis Ovid's Metamorphosis.
My mother gave it me.
Perhaps, she culled it from among the rest.
Soft! So busily she turns the leaves.
Help her! What would she find?--Lavinia, shall I read?
This is the tragic tale of Philomel,
And treats of Tereus' treason and his rape.
And rape, I fear, was root of thy annoy.
See, brother, see! Note how she quotes the leaves.
Lavinia, wert thou thus surprised, sweet girl,
Ravished and wronged as Philomela was,
Forced in the ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods?
See, see! Ay, such a place there is where we did hunt--
Patterned by that the poet here describes,
By nature made for murders and for rapes.
Unless the gods delight in tragedies?
Give signs, sweet girl, for here are none but friends,
What Roman lord it was durst do the deed.
Or slunk not Saturnine, as Tarquin erst,
That left the camp to sin in Lucrece' bed?
Sit down, sweet niece.--Brother, sit down by me.
Apollo, Pallas, Jove, or Mercury
Inspire me, that I may this treason find.--
My lord, look here.--Look here, Lavinia.
This sandy plot is plain; guide, if thou canst,
This after me. I have writ my name
Without the help of any hand at all.
Cursed be that heart that forced us to this shift!
Write thou, good niece, and here display at last
What God will have discovered for revenge.
Heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain,
That we may know the traitors and the truth.
What, what! The lustful sons of Tamora
Performers of this heinous, bloody deed?
Tam lentus audis scelera, tam lentus vides?
There is enough written upon this earth
To stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts
And arm the minds of infants to exclaims.
My lord, kneel down with me.--Lavinia, kneel.--
And kneel, sweet boy, the Roman Hector's hope,
And swear with me--as, with the woeful fere
And father of that chaste dishonored dame,
Lord Junius Brutus swore for Lucrece' rape--
That we will prosecute by good advice
Mortal revenge upon these traitorous Goths,
And see their blood or die with this reproach.
But if you hunt these bearwhelps, then beware;
The dam will wake an if she wind you once.
She's with the lion deeply still in league,
And lulls him whilst she playeth on her back;
And when he sleeps will she do what she list.
You are a young huntsman, Marcus; let alone.
And come, I will go get a leaf of brass,
And with a gad of steel will write these words,
And lay it by. The angry northern wind
Will blow these sands like Sibyl's leaves abroad,
And where's our lesson then?--Boy, what say you?
Their mother's bedchamber should not be safe
For these base bondmen to the yoke of Rome.
Ay, that's my boy! Thy father hath full oft
For his ungrateful country done the like.
And, uncle, so will I, an if I live.
Come, go with me into mine armory.
Lucius, I'll fit thee, and withal my boy
Shall carry from me to the Empress' sons
Presents that I intend to send them both.
Come, come. Thou 'lt do my message, wilt thou not?
Ay, with my dagger in their bosoms, grandsire.
No, boy, not so. I'll teach thee another course.--
Lavinia, come.--Marcus, look to my house.
Lucius and I'll go brave it at the court;
Ay, marry, will we, sir, and we'll be waited on.
And not relent, or not compassion him?
Marcus, attend him in his ecstasy,
That hath more scars of sorrow in his heart
Than foemen's marks upon his battered shield,
But yet so just that he will not revenge.
Revenge the heavens for old Andronicus!
Demetrius, here's the son of Lucius.
He hath some message to deliver us.
Ay, some mad message from his mad grandfather.
My lords, with all the humbleness I may,
Gramercy, lovely Lucius. What's the news?
That you are both deciphered, that's the news,
For villains marked with rape.--May it please you,
My grandsire, well advised, hath sent by me
The goodliest weapons of his armory
To gratify your honorable youth,
The hope of Rome; for so he bid me say,
And so I do, and with his gifts present
Your Lordships, that, whenever you have need,
You may be armed and appointed well,
And so I leave you both-- like bloody villains.
What's here? A scroll, and written round about.
Let's see:
Ay, just; a verse in Horace; right, you have it.
Here's no sound jest. The old man hath found their
And sends them weapons wrapped about with lines
That wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick.
But were our witty empress well afoot,
She would applaud Andronicus' conceit.
But let her rest in her unrest awhile.--
And now, young lords, was 't not a happy star
Led us to Rome, strangers, and, more than so,
Captives, to be advanced to this height?
It did me good before the palace gate
To brave the tribune in his brother's hearing.
But me more good to see so great a lord
Basely insinuate and send us gifts.
Had he not reason, Lord Demetrius?
Did you not use his daughter very friendly?
At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.
Here lacks but your mother for to say amen.
And that would she, for twenty thousand more.
Come, let us go and pray to all the gods
For our beloved mother in her pains.
Pray to the devils; the gods have given us over.
Why do the Emperor's trumpets flourish thus?
Belike for joy the Emperor hath a son.
Well, more or less, or ne'er a whit at all,
Here Aaron is. And what with Aaron now?
Now help, or woe betide thee evermore.
Why, what a caterwauling dost thou keep!
What dost thou wrap and fumble in thy arms?
Our empress' shame and stately Rome's disgrace.
She is delivered, lords, she is delivered.
Well, God give her good rest. What hath he sent her?
Why, then she is the devil's dam. A joyful issue!
Here is the babe, as loathsome as a toad
Amongst the fair-faced breeders of our clime.
The Empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal,
And bids thee christen it with thy dagger's point.
Zounds, you whore, is black so base a hue?
And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone her.
Woe to her chance, and damned her loathed choice!
Accursed the offspring of so foul a fiend!
Aaron, it must. The mother wills it so.
What, must it, nurse? Then let no man but I
Do execution on my flesh and blood.
Nurse, give it me. My sword shall soon dispatch it.
Sooner this sword shall plow thy bowels up!
Stay, murderous villains, will you kill your brother?
Now, by the burning tapers of the sky
That shone so brightly when this boy was got,
He dies upon my scimitar's sharp point
That touches this my firstborn son and heir.
With all his threat'ning band of Typhon's brood,
Nor great Alcides, nor the god of war
Shall seize this prey out of his father's hands.
What, what, you sanguine, shallow-hearted boys,
You white-limed walls, you alehouse painted signs!
Coal-black is better than another hue
In that it scorns to bear another hue;
For all the water in the ocean
Can never turn the swan's black legs to white,
Although she lave them hourly in the flood.
Tell the Empress from me, I am of age
To keep mine own, excuse it how she can.
Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus?
My mistress is my mistress, this myself,
The vigor and the picture of my youth.
This before all the world do I prefer;
This maugre all the world will I keep safe,
Or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome.
By this our mother is forever shamed.
Rome will despise her for this foul escape.
The Emperor in his rage will doom her death.
Why, there's the privilege your beauty bears.
Fie, treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing
The close enacts and counsels of thy heart.
Here's a young lad framed of another leer.
Look how the black slave smiles upon the father,
As who should say "Old lad, I am thine own."
He is your brother, lords, sensibly fed
Of that self blood that first gave life to you,
And from that womb where you imprisoned were
He is enfranchised and come to light.
Nay, he is your brother by the surer side,
Although my seal be stamped in his face.
Aaron, what shall I say unto the Empress?
Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done,
And we will all subscribe to thy advice.
Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.
Then sit we down, and let us all consult.
My son and I will have the wind of you.
Keep there. Now talk at pleasure of your safety.
How many women saw this child of his?
Why, so, brave lords! When we join in league,
The chafed boar, the mountain lioness,
The ocean swells not so as Aaron storms.
Cornelia the midwife and myself,
And no one else but the delivered Empress.
The Empress, the midwife, and yourself.
Two may keep counsel when the third's away.
Go to the Empress; tell her this I said.
What mean'st thou, Aaron? Wherefore didst thou this?
Shall she live to betray this guilt of ours,
And now be it known to you my full intent:
Not far one Muliteus my countryman
His wife but yesternight was brought to bed.
His child is like to her, fair as you are.
Go pack with him, and give the mother gold,
And tell them both the circumstance of all,
And how by this their child shall be advanced
And be received for the Emperor's heir,
And substituted in the place of mine,
To calm this tempest whirling in the court;
And let the Emperor dandle him for his own.
Hark you, lords, you see I have given her physic,
And you must needs bestow her funeral.
The fields are near, and you are gallant grooms.
This done, see that you take no longer days,
But send the midwife presently to me.
The midwife and the nurse well made away,
Then let the ladies tattle what they please.
Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the air
With secrets.
Herself and hers are highly bound to thee.
Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies,
There to dispose this treasure in mine arms
And secretly to greet the Empress' friends.--
Come on, you thick-lipped slave, I'll bear you hence,
For it is you that puts us to our shifts.
And feed on curds and whey, and suck the goat,
And cabin in a cave, and bring you up
To be a warrior and command a camp.
Lucius, and other gentlemen 
Come, Marcus, come. Kinsmen, this is the way.--
Sir boy, let me see your archery.
Look you draw home enough and 'tis there straight.--
Terras Astraea reliquit.
Be you remembered, Marcus, she's gone, she's fled.--
Sirs, take you to your tools. You, cousins, shall
Go sound the ocean and cast your nets;
Happily you may catch her in the sea;
Yet there's as little justice as at land.
No; Publius and Sempronius, you must do it.
And pierce the inmost center of the Earth.
Then, when you come to Pluto's region,
Tell him it is for justice and for aid,
And that it comes from old Andronicus,
Shaken with sorrows in ungrateful Rome.
Ah, Rome! Well, well, I made thee miserable
What time I threw the people's suffrages
On him that thus doth tyrannize o'er me.
Go, get you gone, and pray be careful all,
And leave you not a man-of-war unsearched.
This wicked emperor may have shipped her hence,
And, kinsmen, then we may go pipe for justice.
To see thy noble uncle thus distract?
Therefore, my lords, it highly us concerns
By day and night t' attend him carefully,
And feed his humor kindly as we may,
Till time beget some careful remedy.
Kinsmen, his sorrows are past remedy
But ...
Join with the Goths, and with revengeful war
Take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude,
And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine.
Publius, how now? How now, my masters?
What, have you met with her?
No, my good lord, but Pluto sends you word,
If you will have Revenge from hell, you shall.
Marry, for Justice, she is so employed,
He thinks, with Jove in heaven, or somewhere else,
So that perforce you must needs stay a time.
He doth me wrong to feed me with delays.
And pull her out of Acheron by the heels.
Marcus, we are but shrubs, no cedars we,
No big-boned men framed of the Cyclops' size,
But metal, Marcus, steel to the very back,
Yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can
And sith there's no justice in Earth nor hell,
We will solicit heaven and move the gods
To send down Justice for to wreak our wrongs.
Come, to this gear. You are a good archer, Marcus.
Here, boy, "to Pallas";--here, "to Mercury";--
You were as good to shoot against the wind.
To it, boy!--Marcus, loose when I bid.
Of my word, I have written to effect;
There's not a god left unsolicited.
Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the court.
We will afflict the Emperor in his pride.
Now, masters, draw.  O, well said,
Lucius!
Good boy, in Virgo's lap! Give it Pallas.
My lord, I aim a mile beyond the moon.
Your letter is with Jupiter by this.
Ha, ha! Publius, Publius, what hast thou done?
See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns!
This was the sport, my lord; when Publius shot,
The Bull, being galled, gave Aries such a knock
That down fell both the Ram's horns in the court,
And who should find them but the Empress' villain?
She laughed and told the Moor he should not choose
But give them to his master for a present.
Why, there it goes. God give his Lordship joy!
News, news from heaven! Marcus, the post is
Sirrah, what tidings? Have you any letters?
Shall I have Justice? What says Jupiter?
Sirrah, come hither. Make no more ado,
But give your pigeons to the Emperor.
By me thou shalt have justice at his hands.
Hold, hold; meanwhile here's money for thy
Sirrah, hast thou a knife? Come, let me see it.--
Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration,
For thou hast made it like an humble suppliant.--
And when thou hast given it to the Emperor,
Knock at my door and tell me what he says.
Attendants. The Emperor brings the arrows in his
Why, lords, what wrongs are these! Was ever seen
An emperor in Rome thus overborne,
Troubled, confronted thus, and for the extent
Of equal justice, used in such contempt?
My lords, you know, as know the mightful gods,
However these disturbers of our peace
Buzz in the people's ears, there naught hath passed
But even with law against the willful sons
Of old Andronicus. And what an if
His sorrows have so overwhelmed his wits?
Shall we be thus afflicted in his wreaks,
His fits, his frenzy, and his bitterness?
And now he writes to heaven for his redress!
See, here's "to Jove," and this "to Mercury,"
This "to Apollo," this to the god of war.
Sweet scrolls to fly about the streets of Rome!
What's this but libeling against the Senate
And blazoning our unjustice everywhere?
As who would say, in Rome no justice were.
But if I live, his feigned ecstasies
Shall be no shelter to these outrages,
But he and his shall know that justice lives
In Saturninus' health, whom, if he sleep,
He'll so awake as he in fury shall
Cut off the proud'st conspirator that lives.
My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine,
Lord of my life, commander of my thoughts,
Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus' age,
Th' effects of sorrow for his valiant sons,
Whose loss hath pierced him deep and scarred his
And rather comfort his distressed plight
Than prosecute the meanest or the best
For these contempts.  Why, thus it shall
High-witted Tamora to gloze with all.
But, Titus, I have touched thee to the quick.
Thy lifeblood out, if Aaron now be wise,
Then is all safe, the anchor in the port.
How now, good fellow, wouldst thou speak with us?
Empress I am, but yonder sits the Emperor.
Go, take him away, and hang him presently.
Despiteful and intolerable wrongs!
Shall I endure this monstrous villainy?
May this be borne?--as if his traitorous sons,
That died by law for murder of our brother,
Have by my means been butchered wrongfully!
Go, drag the villain hither by the hair.
Nor age nor honor shall shape privilege.
For this proud mock, I'll be thy slaughterman,
Sly, frantic wretch, that holp'st to make me great
In hope thyself should govern Rome and me.
Arm, my lords! Rome never had more cause.
The Goths have gathered head, and with a power
Of high-resolved men bent to the spoil,
They hither march amain under conduct
Of Lucius, son to old Andronicus,
Who threats, in course of this revenge, to do
As much as ever Coriolanus did.
Is warlike Lucius general of the Goths?
These tidings nip me, and I hang the head
As flowers with frost or grass beat down with storms.
Ay, now begins our sorrows to approach.
Myself hath often heard them say,
When I have walked like a private man,
That Lucius' banishment was wrongfully,
And they have wished that Lucius were their emperor.
Why should you fear? Is not your city strong?
Ay, but the citizens favor Lucius
And will revolt from me to succor him.
King, be thy thoughts imperious like thy name.
Is the sun dimmed that gnats do fly in it?
The eagle suffers little birds to sing
And is not careful what they mean thereby,
Knowing that with the shadow of his wings
He can at pleasure stint their melody.
Even so mayst thou the giddy men of Rome.
Then cheer thy spirit, for know, thou emperor,
With words more sweet and yet more dangerous
Than baits to fish or honey-stalks to sheep,
Whenas the one is wounded with the bait,
The other rotted with delicious feed.
But he will not entreat his son for us.
If Tamora entreat him, then he will,
For I can smooth and fill his aged ears
With golden promises, that were his heart
Almost impregnable, his old ears deaf,
Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.
Say that the Emperor requests a parley
Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting
Even at his father's house, the old Andronicus.
Aemilius, do this message honorably,
And if he stand in hostage for his safety,
Bid him demand what pledge will please him best.
Your bidding shall I do effectually.
Now will I to that old Andronicus
And temper him with all the art I have
To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.
And now, sweet emperor, be blithe again,
And bury all thy fear in my devices.
Then go successantly, and plead to him.
Drums and Soldiers.]
Approved warriors and my faithful friends,
Which signifies what hate they bear their emperor
And how desirous of our sight they are.
Therefore, great lords, be as your titles witness,
Imperious, and impatient of your wrongs,
And wherein Rome hath done you any scathe,
Let him make treble satisfaction.
Brave slip sprung from the great Andronicus,
Whose name was once our terror, now our comfort,
Whose high exploits and honorable deeds
Ingrateful Rome requites with foul contempt,
Be bold in us. We'll follow where thou lead'st,
Like stinging bees in hottest summer's day
Led by their master to the flowered fields,
And be avenged on cursed Tamora.
And as he saith, so say we all with him.
But who comes here, led by a lusty Goth?
Renowned Lucius, from our troops I strayed
To gaze upon a ruinous monastery,
And as I earnestly did fix mine eye
Upon the wasted building, suddenly
The crying babe controlled with this discourse:
Did not thy hue bewray whose brat thou art,
Had nature lent thee but thy mother's look,
Villain, thou mightst have been an emperor.
But where the bull and cow are both milk white,
They never do beget a coal-black calf.
Peace, villain, peace!"--even thus he rates the babe--
Who, when he knows thou art the Empress' babe,
Will hold thee dearly for thy mother's sake."
With this, my weapon drawn, I rushed upon him,
Surprised him suddenly, and brought him hither
To use as you think needful of the man.
That robbed Andronicus of his good hand;
This is the pearl that pleased your empress' eye;
And here's the base fruit of her burning lust.--
Say, wall-eyed slave, whither wouldst thou convey
This growing image of thy fiendlike face?
Why dost not speak? What, deaf? Not a word?--
And by his side his fruit of bastardy.
Touch not the boy. He is of royal blood.
Too like the sire for ever being good.
First hang the child, that he may see it sprawl,
Get me a ladder.
And bear it from me to the Empress.
If thou do this, I'll show thee wondrous things
That highly may advantage thee to hear.
If thou wilt not, befall what may befall,
Say on, and if it please me which thou speak'st,
Thy child shall live, and I will see it nourished.
And if it please thee? Why, assure thee, Lucius,
For I must talk of murders, rapes, and massacres,
Acts of black night, abominable deeds,
Complots of mischief, treason, villainies,
Ruthful to hear, yet piteously performed.
And this shall all be buried in my death,
Unless thou swear to me my child shall live.
Tell on thy mind. I say thy child shall live.
Swear that he shall, and then I will begin.
Who should I swear by? Thou believest no god.
That granted, how canst thou believe an oath?
What if I do not? As indeed I do not.
Yet, for I know thou art religious
And hast a thing within thee called conscience,
With twenty popish tricks and ceremonies
Which I have seen thee careful to observe,
Therefore I urge thy oath; for that I know
An idiot holds his bauble for a god
And keeps the oath which by that god he swears,
To that I'll urge him. Therefore thou shalt vow
By that same god, what god soe'er it be
That thou adorest and hast in reverence,
To save my boy, to nourish and bring him up,
Or else I will discover naught to thee.
Even by my god I swear to thee I will.
First know thou, I begot him on the Empress.
Tut, Lucius, this was but a deed of charity
To that which thou shalt hear of me anon.
They cut thy sister's tongue, and ravished her,
And cut her hands, and trimmed her as thou sawest.
Why, she was washed, and cut, and trimmed; and
Trim sport for them which had the doing of it.
Indeed, I was their tutor to instruct them.
That codding spirit had they from their mother,
As sure a card as ever won the set;
That bloody mind I think they learned of me,
As true a dog as ever fought at head.
Well, let my deeds be witness of my worth.
Where the dead corpse of Bassianus lay.
And hid the gold within that letter mentioned,
Confederate with the Queen and her two sons.
And what not done that thou hast cause to rue,
Wherein I had no stroke of mischief in it?
And, when I had it, drew myself apart
And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter.
When, for his hand, he had his two sons' heads,
Beheld his tears, and laughed so heartily
That both mine eyes were rainy like to his.
And when I told the Empress of this sport,
She sounded almost at my pleasing tale,
And for my tidings gave me twenty kisses.
What, canst thou say all this and never blush?
Ay, like a black dog, as the saying is.
Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds?
Ay, that I had not done a thousand more.
Even now I curse the day--and yet, I think,
Few come within the compass of my curse--
Wherein I did not some notorious ill,
As kill a man, or else devise his death;
Ravish a maid or plot the way to do it;
Accuse some innocent and forswear myself;
Set deadly enmity between two friends;
Make poor men's cattle break their necks;
Set fire on barns and haystalks in the night,
And bid the owners quench them with their tears.
Oft have I digged up dead men from their graves
And set them upright at their dear friends' door,
Even when their sorrows almost was forgot,
And on their skins, as on the bark of trees,
Have with my knife carved in Roman letters
But I have done a thousand dreadful things
As willingly as one would kill a fly,
And nothing grieves me heartily indeed
But that I cannot do ten thousand more.
Bring down the devil, for he must not die
So sweet a death as hanging presently.
If there be devils, would I were a devil,
To live and burn in everlasting fire,
So I might have your company in hell
But to torment you with my bitter tongue.
Sirs, stop his mouth, and let him speak no more.
My lord, there is a messenger from Rome
Desires to be admitted to your presence.
Welcome, Aemilius. What's the news from Rome?
Lord Lucius, and you princes of the Goths,
The Roman Emperor greets you all by me;
And, for he understands you are in arms,
He craves a parley at your father's house,
Willing you to demand your hostages,
And they shall be immediately delivered.
Aemilius, let the Emperor give his pledges
Unto my father and my uncle Marcus,
And we will come. March away.
Thus, in this strange and sad habiliment
And say I am Revenge, sent from below
To join with him and right his heinous wrongs.
Knock at his study, where they say he keeps
To ruminate strange plots of dire revenge.
Tell him Revenge is come to join with him
And work confusion on his enemies.
Who doth molest my contemplation?
Is it your trick to make me ope the door,
That so my sad decrees may fly away
And all my study be to no effect?
You are deceived, for what I mean to do,
See here, in bloody lines I have set down,
And what is written shall be executed.
Titus, I am come to talk with thee.
No, not a word. How can I grace my talk,
Wanting a hand to give it action?
Thou hast the odds of me; therefore, no more.
If thou didst know me, thou wouldst talk with me.
Witness this wretched stump; witness these crimson
Witness these trenches made by grief and care;
Witness the tiring day and heavy night;
Witness all sorrow that I know thee well
For our proud empress, mighty Tamora.
Is not thy coming for my other hand?
Know, thou sad man, I am not Tamora.
She is thy enemy, and I thy friend.
To ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind
By working wreakful vengeance on thy foes.
Come down and welcome me to this world's light.
Confer with me of murder and of death.
There's not a hollow cave or lurking-place,
No vast obscurity or misty vale
Where bloody murder or detested rape
Can couch for fear but I will find them out,
And in their ears tell them my dreadful name,
Revenge, which makes the foul offender quake.
Art thou Revenge? And art thou sent to me
To be a torment to mine enemies?
Do me some service ere I come to thee.
Lo, by thy side, where Rape and Murder stands,
Now give some surance that thou art Revenge:
Stab them, or tear them on thy chariot wheels,
And then I'll come and be thy wagoner,
And whirl along with thee about the globe,
Provide thee two proper palfreys, black as jet,
To hale thy vengeful wagon swift away,
And find out murderers in their guilty caves.
And when thy car is loaden with their heads,
Trot like a servile footman all day long,
Even from Hyperion's rising in the east
Until his very downfall in the sea.
And day by day I'll do this heavy task,
So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.
These are my ministers and come with me.
Are they thy ministers? What are they called?
Rape and Murder; therefore called so
Good Lord, how like the Empress' sons they are,
And you the Empress! But we worldly men
Have miserable, mad, mistaking eyes.
And if one arm's embracement will content thee,
This closing with him fits his lunacy.
Whate'er I forge to feed his brainsick humors,
Do you uphold and maintain in your speeches,
For now he firmly takes me for Revenge;
And, being credulous in this mad thought,
And whilst I at a banquet hold him sure,
To scatter and disperse the giddy Goths,
Or, at the least, make them his enemies.
See, here he comes, and I must ply my theme.
Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee.
Welcome, dread Fury, to my woeful house.--
Rapine and Murder, you are welcome too.
How like the Empress and her sons you are!
Well are you fitted, had you but a Moor.
Could not all hell afford you such a devil?
For well I wot the Empress never wags
But in her company there is a Moor;
And, would you represent our queen aright,
It were convenient you had such a devil.
But welcome as you are. What shall we do?
What wouldst thou have us do, Andronicus?
Show me a murderer; I'll deal with him.
Show me a villain that hath done a rape,
And I am sent to be revenged on him.
Show me a thousand that hath done thee wrong,
And I will be revenged on them all.
Look round about the wicked streets of Rome,
And when thou findst a man that's like thyself,
Good Murder, stab him; he's a murderer.
To find another that is like to thee,
Good Rapine, stab him; he is a ravisher.
Emperor's court
There is a queen attended by a Moor.
Well shalt thou know her by thine own proportion,
For up and down she doth resemble thee.
They have been violent to me and mine.
Well hast thou lessoned us; this shall we do.
But would it please thee, good Andronicus,
To send for Lucius, thy thrice-valiant son,
Who leads towards Rome a band of warlike Goths,
And bid him come and banquet at thy house?
When he is here, even at thy solemn feast,
The Emperor himself, and all thy foes,
And at thy mercy shall they stoop and kneel,
And on them shalt thou ease thy angry heart.
What says Andronicus to this device?
Marcus, my brother, 'tis sad Titus calls.
Go, gentle Marcus, to thy nephew Lucius.
Thou shalt inquire him out among the Goths.
Bid him repair to me and bring with him
Some of the chiefest princes of the Goths.
Bid him encamp his soldiers where they are.
Tell him the Emperor and the Empress too
Feast at my house, and he shall feast with them.
This do thou for my love, and so let him,
As he regards his aged father's life.
This will I do, and soon return again.	
Now will I hence about thy business
And take my ministers along with me.
Nay, nay, let Rape and Murder stay with me,
Or else I'll call my brother back again
And cleave to no revenge but Lucius.
What say you, boys? Will you abide with him
Whiles I go tell my lord the Emperor
How I have governed our determined jest?
Yield to his humor, smooth and speak him fair,
And tarry with him till I turn again.
And will o'erreach them in their own devices--
Madam, depart at pleasure. Leave us here.
Farewell, Andronicus. Revenge now goes
To lay a complot to betray thy foes.
Tell us, old man, how shall we be employed?
Tut, I have work enough for you to do.--
Publius, come hither; Caius, and Valentine.
The Empress' sons, I take them--Chiron, Demetrius.
Fie, Publius, fie, thou art too much deceived.
The one is Murder, and Rape is the other's name;
And therefore bind them, gentle Publius.
Caius and Valentine, lay hands on them.
Oft have you heard me wish for such an hour,
And now I find it. Therefore bind them sure,
And stop their mouths if they begin to cry.
Villains, forbear! We are the Empress' sons.
And therefore do we what we are commanded.--
Stop close their mouths; let them not speak a word.
Is he sure bound? Look that you bind them fast.
Come, come, Lavinia. Look, thy foes are bound.--
Sirs, stop their mouths. Let them not speak to me,
But let them hear what fearful words I utter.--
Here stands the spring whom you have stained with
This goodly summer with your winter mixed.
You killed her husband, and for that vile fault
Two of her brothers were condemned to death,
My hand cut off and made a merry jest,
Both her sweet hands, her tongue, and that more dear
Than hands or tongue, her spotless chastity,
Inhuman traitors, you constrained and forced.
What would you say if I should let you speak?
Villains, for shame you could not beg for grace.
Hark, wretches, how I mean to martyr you.
This one hand yet is left to cut your throats,
Whiles that Lavinia 'tween her stumps doth hold
The basin that receives your guilty blood.
You know your mother means to feast with me,
And calls herself Revenge, and thinks me mad.
Hark, villains, I will grind your bones to dust,
And with your blood and it I'll make a paste,
And of the paste a coffin I will rear,
And make two pasties of your shameful heads,
And bid that strumpet, your unhallowed dam,
Like to the earth swallow her own increase.
This is the feast that I have bid her to,
And this the banquet she shall surfeit on;
For worse than Philomel you used my daughter,
And worse than Procne I will be revenged.
And now prepare your throats.--Lavinia, come,
Receive the blood.	
And when that they are dead,
Let me go grind their bones to powder small,
And with this hateful liquor temper it,
And in that paste let their vile heads be baked.
Come, come, be everyone officious
To make this banquet, which I wish may prove
More stern and bloody than the Centaurs' feast.
So. Now bring them in, for I'll play the cook
And see them ready against their mother comes.
Guards, and an Attendant carrying the baby.]
Uncle Marcus, since 'tis my father's mind
That I repair to Rome, I am content.
And ours with thine, befall what fortune will.
Good uncle, take you in this barbarous Moor,
This ravenous tiger, this accursed devil.
Let him receive no sust'nance. Fetter him
Till he be brought unto the Empress' face
For testimony of her foul proceedings.
And see the ambush of our friends be strong.
Some devil whisper curses in my ear
And prompt me that my tongue may utter forth
The venomous malice of my swelling heart.
Away, inhuman dog, unhallowed slave!--
Sirs, help our uncle to convey him in.
The trumpets show the Emperor is at hand.
What, hath the firmament more suns than one?
What boots it thee to call thyself a sun?
Rome's emperor, and nephew, break the parle.
These quarrels must be quietly debated.
The feast is ready which the careful Titus
Hath ordained to an honorable end,
For peace, for love, for league and good to Rome.
Please you therefore draw nigh and take your places.
Welcome, my lord;--welcome, dread queen;--
Welcome, you warlike Goths;--welcome, Lucius;--
And welcome, all. Although the cheer be poor,
Why art thou thus attired, Andronicus?
Because I would be sure to have all well
To entertain your Highness and your empress.
We are beholding to you, good Andronicus.
An if your Highness knew my heart, you were.--
My lord the Emperor, resolve me this:
Was it well done of rash Virginius
To slay his daughter with his own right hand
Because she was enforced, stained, and deflowered?
Because the girl should not survive her shame,
And by her presence still renew his sorrows.
For me, most wretched, to perform the like.
Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee,
And with thy shame thy father's sorrow die.
What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind?
Killed her for whom my tears have made me blind.
And have a thousand times more cause than he
To do this outrage, and it now is done.
What, was she ravished? Tell who did the deed.
Will 't please you eat?--Will 't please your Highness
Why hast thou slain thine only daughter thus?
Not I; 'twas Chiron and Demetrius.
They ravished her and cut away her tongue,
And they, 'twas they, that did her all this wrong.
Go fetch them hither to us presently.
Why, there they are, both baked in this pie,
Whereof their mother daintily hath fed,
Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred.
Die, frantic wretch, for this accursed deed.
Can the son's eye behold his father bleed?
There's meed for meed, death for a deadly deed.
You sad-faced men, people and sons of Rome,
By uproars severed as a flight of fowl
Scattered by winds and high tempestuous gusts,
This scattered corn into one mutual sheaf,
These broken limbs again into one body,
Lest Rome herself be bane unto herself,
And she whom mighty kingdoms curtsy to,
Like a forlorn and desperate castaway,
Do shameful execution on herself.
But if my frosty signs and chaps of age,
Grave witnesses of true experience,
Cannot induce you to attend my words,
Speak, Rome's dear friend, as erst our ancestor,
When with his solemn tongue he did discourse
To lovesick Dido's sad-attending ear
The story of that baleful burning night
When subtle Greeks surprised King Priam's Troy.
Tell us what Sinon hath bewitched our ears,
Or who hath brought the fatal engine in
That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound.--
My heart is not compact of flint nor steel,
Nor can I utter all our bitter grief,
But floods of tears will drown my oratory
And break my utterance even in the time
When it should move you to attend me most
And force you to commiseration.
Here's Rome's young captain. Let him tell the tale,
While I stand by and weep to hear him speak.
Then, gracious auditory, be it known to you
That Chiron and the damned Demetrius
Were they that murdered our emperor's brother,
And they it were that ravished our sister.
For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded,
Our father's tears despised, and basely cozened
Of that true hand that fought Rome's quarrel out
And sent her enemies unto the grave;
Lastly, myself unkindly banished,
The gates shut on me, and turned weeping out
To beg relief among Rome's enemies,
Who drowned their enmity in my true tears
And oped their arms to embrace me as a friend.
That have preserved her welfare in my blood
And from her bosom took the enemy's point,
Sheathing the steel in my advent'rous body.
Alas, you know I am no vaunter, I;
My scars can witness, dumb although they are,
That my report is just and full of truth.
But soft, methinks I do digress too much,
Citing my worthless praise. O, pardon me,
For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.
Now is my turn to speak. Behold the child.
Of this was Tamora delivered,
The issue of an irreligious Moor,
Chief architect and plotter of these woes.
The villain is alive in Titus' house,
And as he is to witness, this is true.
Now judge what cause had Titus to revenge
These wrongs unspeakable, past patience,
Or more than any living man could bear.
Now have you heard the truth. What say you,
Romans?
Have we done aught amiss? Show us wherein,
And from the place where you behold us pleading,
The poor remainder of Andronici
Will, hand in hand, all headlong hurl ourselves,
And on the ragged stones beat forth our souls,
And make a mutual closure of our house.
Speak, Romans, speak, and if you say we shall,
Lo, hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall.
Come, come, thou reverend man of Rome,
And bring our emperor gently in thy hand,
Lucius our emperor, for well I know
The common voice do cry it shall be so.
Lucius, all hail, Rome's royal emperor!
Go, go into old Titus' sorrowful house,
And hither hale that misbelieving Moor
To be adjudged some direful slaught'ring death
As punishment for his most wicked life.
Lucius, all hail, Rome's gracious governor!
Thanks, gentle Romans. May I govern so
To heal Rome's harms and wipe away her woe!
But, gentle people, give me aim awhile,
For nature puts me to a heavy task.
Stand all aloof, but, uncle, draw you near
To shed obsequious tears upon this trunk.
These sorrowful drops upon thy bloodstained face,
The last true duties of thy noble son.
Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss,
Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips.
Countless and infinite, yet would I pay them.
Come hither, boy. Come, come, and learn of us
To melt in showers. Thy grandsire loved thee well.
Many a time he danced thee on his knee,
Sung thee asleep, his loving breast thy pillow;
Many a story hath he told to thee,
And bid thee bear his pretty tales in mind
And talk of them when he was dead and gone.
How many thousand times hath these poor lips,
When they were living, warmed themselves on thine!
Bid him farewell; commit him to the grave.
Do them that kindness, and take leave of them.
Would I were dead so you did live again!
My tears will choke me if I ope my mouth.
You sad Andronici, have done with woes.
Give sentence on this execrable wretch
That hath been breeder of these dire events.
Set him breast-deep in earth and famish him.
There let him stand and rave and cry for food.
If anyone relieves or pities him,
For the offense he dies. This is our doom.
Some stay to see him fastened in the earth.
Ah, why should wrath be mute and fury dumb?
Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did
Would I perform, if I might have my will.
If one good deed in all my life I did,
Some loving friends convey the Emperor hence,
And give him burial in his fathers' grave.
My father and Lavinia shall forthwith
Be closed in our household's monument.
As for that ravenous tiger, Tamora,
No funeral rite, nor man in mourning weed;
No mournful bell shall ring her burial;
But throw her forth to beasts and birds to prey.
Her life was beastly and devoid of pity,
And being dead, let birds on her take pity.
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
You come most carefully upon your hour.
For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
And I am sick at heart.
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
That, if again this apparition come,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
And let us once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our story,
What we have two nights seen.
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
The bell then beating one--
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.
In the same figure like the King that's dead.
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
It would be spoke to.
What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
It is offended.
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on 't?
Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes.
Such was the very armor he had on
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
In what particular thought to work I know not,
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Why this same strict and most observant watch
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And foreign mart for implements of war,
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
Who is 't that can inform me?
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
Against the which a moiety competent
Was gaged by our king, which had returned
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
And carriage of the article designed,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
For food and diet to some enterprise
That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other
But to recover of us, by strong hand
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Comes armed through our watch so like the king
That was and is the question of these wars.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And even the like precurse of feared events,
As harbingers preceding still the fates
And prologue to the omen coming on,
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
Unto our climatures and countrymen.
But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
Speak to me.
If there be any good thing to be done
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
Speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
Speak of it.	
Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.
Shall I strike it with my partisan?
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
To offer it the show of violence,
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
And then it started like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine, and of the truth herein
This present object made probation.
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most convenient.
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
Cornelius.]
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
He hath not failed to pester us with message
Importing the surrender of those lands
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
To our most valiant brother--so much for him.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
The lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King more than the scope
Of these dilated articles allow.
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
In that and all things will we show our duty.
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
Laertes,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
Your leave and favor to return to France,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your coronation,
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
By laborsome petition, and at last
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not forever with thy vailed lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.
Ay, madam, it is common.
Why seems it so particular with thee?
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"
For they are actions that a man might play;
But I have that within which passes show,
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your father.
But you must know your father lost a father,
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
In filial obligation for some term
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
In obstinate condolement is a course
Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
An understanding simple and unschooled.
For what we know must be and is as common
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
From the first corse till he that died today,
This unprevailing woe and think of us
As of a father; for let the world take note,
You are the most immediate to our throne,
And with no less nobility of love
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
It is most retrograde to our desire,
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.
So excellent a king, that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
With which she followed my poor father's body,
Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
My father's brother, but no more like my father
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
Horatio--or I do forget myself!
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--
Marcellus?
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
To make it truster of your own report
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
My father--methinks I see my father.
Where, my lord?
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
My lord, the King your father.
Season your admiration for a while
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
This marvel to you.
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,
Appears before them and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes
Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Form of the thing ,
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
These hands are not more like.
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
Did you not speak to it?
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
It lifted up its head and did address
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
And vanished from our sight.
As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.
Hold you the watch tonight?
Armed, say you?
Nay, very pale.
Most constantly.
While one with moderate haste might tell a
Not when I saw 't.
It was as I have seen it in his life,
Perchance 'twill walk again.
If it assume my noble father's person,
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
But let me hear from you.
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
No more.
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
The inward service of the mind and soul
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
For he himself is subject to his birth.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
The safety and the health of this whole state.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
As he in his particular act and place
May give his saying deed, which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
If with too credent ear you list his songs
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
To his unmastered importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
And recks not his own rede.
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
And these few precepts in thy memory
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not expressed in fancy ,
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
And they in France of the best rank and station
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all: to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
What I have said to you.
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
So please you, something touching the Lord
Hamlet.
Given private time to you, and you yourself
Have of your audience been most free and
If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
You do not understand yourself so clearly
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Of his affection to me.
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
In honorable fashion--
Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him that he is young,
And with a larger tether may he walk
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
The better to beguile. This is for all:
Have you so slander any moment leisure
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
It is a nipping and an eager air.
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
What does this mean, my lord?
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his pledge.
But, to my mind, though I am native here
And to the manner born, it is a custom
More honored in the breach than the observance.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
From our achievements, though performed at
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
So oft it chances in particular men
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion
Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
The form of plausive manners--that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Being nature's livery or fortune's star,
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
As infinite as man may undergo,
Shall in the general censure take corruption
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
To his own scandal.
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
It beckons you to go away with it
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone.
It waves you to a more removed ground.
But do not go with it.
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.
Do not, my lord.
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible form
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
And hears it roar beneath.
It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.
You shall not go, my lord.	
Be ruled. You shall not go.
And makes each petty arture in this body
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
He waxes desperate with imagination.
Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.
Have after. To what issue will this come?
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
Heaven will direct it.
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no
Mark me.
When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames
Must render up myself.
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall unfold.
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
And for the day confined to fast in fires
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
If thou didst ever thy dear father love--
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
May sweep to my revenge.
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
Is by a forged process of my death
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
Now wears his crown.
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--
So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
From me, whose love was of that dignity
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
To those of mine.
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage.
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
My custom always of the afternoon,
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
With juice of cursed hebona in a vial
And in the porches of my ears did pour
The leprous distilment, whose effect
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
And a most instant tetter barked about,
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
All my smooth body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
No reck'ning made, but sent to my account
With all my imperfections on my head.
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
Yea, from the table of my memory
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
That youth and observation copied there,
And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
My tables--meet it is I set it down
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."
How is 't, my noble lord?
Good my lord, tell it.
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
But you'll be secret?
There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
But he's an arrant knave.
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
To tell us this.
And so, without more circumstance at all,
You, as your business and desire shall point you
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
Yes, faith, heartily.
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.
For your desire to know what is between us,
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.
Never make known what you have seen tonight.
Upon my sword.
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Consent to swear.
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Swear by my sword.
Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
Come hither, gentlemen,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
Swear by my sword
Never to speak of this that you have heard.
Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
How strange or odd some'er I bear myself
To put an antic disposition on)
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we
Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
That you know aught of me--this do swear,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,
With all my love I do commend me to you,
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
May do t' express his love and friending to you,
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
That ever I was born to set it right!
Nay, come, let's go together.
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Of his behavior.
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who, what means, and where they
What company, at what expense; and finding
By this encompassment and drift of question
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
As thus: "I know his father and his friends
And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,
Addicted so and so." And there put on him
What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
As are companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.
Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
You must not put another scandal on him
That he is open to incontinency;
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
Of general assault.
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
He closes with you in this consequence:
According to the phrase or the addition
Of man and country--
At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--
He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,
There falling out at tennis"; or perchance
Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
By indirections find directions out.
So by my former lecture and advice
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
My lord, I have.
Observe his inclination in yourself.
Farewell.	
How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a look so piteous in purport
As if he had been loosed out of hell
To speak of horrors--he comes before me.
Mad for thy love?
But truly I do fear it.
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
For out o' doors he went without their helps
And to the last bended their light on me.
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Whose violent property fordoes itself
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
As oft as any passions under heaven
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
No, my good lord, but as you did command
His access to me.
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Come.
Guildenstern and Attendants.]
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
So much from th' understanding of himself
That, being of so young days brought up with him
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Some little time, so by your companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
That, opened, lies within our remedy.
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
And sure I am two men there is not living
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
As to expend your time with us awhile
For the supply and profit of our hope,
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a king's remembrance.
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Than to entreaty.
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
To lay our service freely at your feet,
To be commanded.
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Pleasant and helpful to him!
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
Are joyfully returned.
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath used to do, that I have found
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
The head and source of all your son's distemper.
His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
Well, we shall sift him.
Polonius.]
Welcome, my good friends.
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His nephew's levies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
But, better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
Makes vow before his uncle never more
To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
So levied as before, against the Polack,
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
On such regards of safety and allowance
As therein are set down.
And, at our more considered time, we'll read,
Answer, and think upon this business.
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.
Most welcome home!
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go.
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,
And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Perpend.
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
And more above, hath his solicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
All given to mine ear.
As of a man faithful and honorable.
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
If I had played the desk or table-book
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
And he, repelled ,
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves
And all we mourn for.
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
That I have positively said "'Tis so,"
When it proved otherwise?
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
If circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
Within the center.
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Here in the lobby.
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
As the indifferent children of the earth.
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.
She is a strumpet. What news?
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?
Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot
Elsinore?
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad
Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
So, proceed you.
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,
Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
Now falls on Priam.
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
In general synod take away her power,
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
As low as to the fiends!
Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--
Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
About her lank and all o'erteemed loins
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
But if the gods themselves did see her then
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
The instant burst of clamor that she made
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
And passion in the gods.
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
Now I am alone.
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!
For Hecuba!
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he do
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing--no, not for a king
Upon whose property and most dear life
Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
Been struck so to the soul that presently
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
Play something like the murder of my father
Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
As he is very potent with such spirits,
Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
More relative than this. The play's the thing
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.
Guildenstern, and Lords.]
And can you by no drift of conference
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
When we would bring him on to some confession
Of his true state.
But with much forcing of his disposition.
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Most free in his reply.
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
And, as I think, they have already order
This night to play before him.
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
To hear him so inclined.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
And drive his purpose into these delights.
We shall, my lord.	
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
Affront Ophelia.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
We may of their encounter frankly judge
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If 't be th' affliction of his love or no
That thus he suffers for.
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your honors.
Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,
We will bestow ourselves.  Read on this
That show of such an exercise may color
Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this
And pious action we do sugar o'er
The devil himself.
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
To be or not to be--that is the question:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--
No more--and by a sleep to say we end
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons
Be all my sins remembered.
How does your Honor for this many a day?
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
That I have longed long to redeliver.
No, not I. I never gave you aught.
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.
Where's your father?
To a nunnery, go.	
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,
Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
With variable objects, shall expel
This something-settled matter in his heart,
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
To England send him, or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
Will you two help to hasten them?
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
As e'er my conversation coped withal.
For what advancement may I hope from thee
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Whose blood and judgment are so well
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
There is a play tonight before the King.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee of my father's death.
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
And, after, we will both our judgments join
In censure of his seeming.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
Get you a place.
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying
Capitol. Brutus killed me.
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties been
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
For women fear too much, even as they love,
And women's fear and love hold quantity,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
And thou shall live in this fair world behind,
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
For husband shalt thou--
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
In second husband let me be accurst.
None wed the second but who killed the first.
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
When second husband kisses me in bed.
But what we do determine oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of either grief or joy
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
Directly seasons him his enemy.
But, orderly to end where I begun:
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
That our devices still are overthrown;
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep.	
And never come mischance between us twain.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural magic and dire property
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
Come, some music!
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
Have you any further trade with us?
Denmark?
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
God bless you, sir.
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
And do such bitter business as the day
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
How in my words somever she be shent,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
And he to England shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure
Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow
Out of his brows.
Most holy and religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.
The single and peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and armor of the mind
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him
And, as you said ,
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
And tell you what I know.
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
And, like a man to double business bound,
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
But to confront the visage of offense?
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
All may be well.	
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
And now I'll do 't.	
And so he goes to heaven,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
To heaven.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
But in our circumstance and course of thought
To take him in the purging of his soul,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
No.
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
That has no relish of salvation in 't--
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damned and black
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
Pray you, be round with him.
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Mother, you have my father much offended.
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Why, how now, Hamlet?
Have you forgot me?
You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
And  you are my mother.
Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
You go not till I set you up a glass
Where you may see the inmost part of you.
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
Help, ho!
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
As kill a king and marry with his brother.
As kill a king?
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If damned custom have not brazed it so
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.
What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
In noise so rude against me?
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed
As from the body of contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
With heated visage, as against the doom,
Is thought-sick at the act.
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
Look here upon this picture and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
Where every god did seem to set his seal
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
You cannot call it love, for at your age
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,
But it reserved some quantity of choice
To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Rebellious hell,
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
And reason panders will.
Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,
And there I see such black and grained spots
As will not leave their tinct.
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Over the nasty sty!
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
No more, sweet Hamlet!
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
And put it in his pocket--
Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
Th' important acting of your dread command?
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Speak to her, Hamlet.
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable.  Do not
Lest with this piteous action you convert
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he lived!
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
Is very cunning in.
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
And I the matter will reword, which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
And live the purer with the other half!
Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
That to the use of actions fair and good
He likewise gives a frock or livery
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
And either ... the devil or throw him out
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
To punish me with this and this with me,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
One word more, good lady.
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out
That I essentially am not in madness,
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
And break your own neck down.
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
What thou hast said to me.
There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard
But I will delve one yard below their mines
And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
This man shall set me packing.
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--
Good night, mother.
Guildenstern.]
There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
Where is your son?
Bestow this place on us a little while.
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"
And in this brainish apprehension kills
The unseen good old man.
It had been so with us, had we been there.
His liberty is full of threats to all--
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
We would not understand what was most fit,
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
Among a mineral of metals base,
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
We must with all our majesty and skill
Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!
Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
And let them know both what we mean to do
And what's untimely done. ...
Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
As level as the cannon to his blank
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
And bear it to the chapel.
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
He's loved of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
This sudden sending him away must seem
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
By desperate appliance are relieved
Or not at all.
How now, what hath befallen?
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
We cannot get from him.
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
Bring him before us.
That's the end.
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
For England.
So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
England.
Farewell, dear mother.
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--
Come, for England.	
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.
Away, for everything is sealed and done
That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.
And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
By letters congruing to that effect,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
We shall express our duty in his eye;
And let him know so.
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Or for some frontier?
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
We go to gain a little patch of ground
That hath in it no profit but the name.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.
Yes, it is already garrisoned.
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Will not debate the question of this straw.
This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.
How all occasions do inform against me
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
If his chief good and market of his time
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and godlike reason
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Of thinking too precisely on th' event
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Is not to stir without great argument,
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Which is not tomb enough and continent
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
Indeed would make one think there might be
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
Oh, ho!
Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:
He answers:
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
All from her father's death, and now behold!
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
For good Polonius' death, and we have done but
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
Gives me superfluous death.
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
What is the matter?
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
And, as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
The ratifiers and props of every word,
They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.
Give me my father!
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me
Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot
Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow
Of my true mother.
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
That treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,
Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,
Gertrude.--
Speak, man.
But not by him.
How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged
Most throughly for my father.
And for my means, I'll husband them so well
They shall go far with little.
If you desire to know the certainty
Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
Winner and loser?
To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
Repast them with my blood.
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
That I am guiltless of your father's death
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
It shall as level to your judgment 'pear
As day does to your eye.
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of itself
After the thing it loves.
Fare you well, my dove.
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
It could not move thus.
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
She turns to favor and to prettiness.
And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
If by direct or by collateral hand
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
To give it due content.
His means of death, his obscure funeral
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
That I must call 't in question.
And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
He that thou knowest thine,
Hamlet.
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
And do 't the speedier that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your noble father slain
Pursued my life.
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
So criminal and so capital in nature,
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
You mainly were stirred up.
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
Why to a public count I might not go
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
Would have reverted to my bow again,
But not where I have aimed them.
And so have I a noble father lost,
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--
How now? What news?
Hamlet.
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
Of him that brought them.
Leave us.	
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?
And in a postscript here, he says "alone."
Can you advise me?
It warms the very sickness in my heart
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
Will you be ruled by me?
So you will not o'errule me to a peace.
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
No more to undertake it, I will work him
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
And call it accident.
The rather if you could devise it so
That I might be the organ.
You have been talked of since your travel much,
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Did not together pluck such envy from him
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
Of the unworthiest siege.
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
The light and careless livery that it wears
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
Come short of what he did.
Upon my life, Lamord.
And gem of all the nation.
And gave you such a masterly report
For art and exercise in your defense,
And for your rapier most especial,
That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.
Now out of this--
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
Not that I think you did not love your father,
But that I know love is begun by time
And that I see, in passages of proof,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
There lives within the very flame of love
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
We should do when we would; for this "would"
And hath abatements and delays as many
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
To show yourself indeed your father's son
More than in words?
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
Requite him for your father.
And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
It may be death.
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
And that our drift look through our bad
Should have a back or second that might hold
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--
When in your motion you are hot and dry
And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what
One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.
There is a willow grows askant the brook
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
When down her weedy trophies and herself
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
As one incapable of her own distress
Or like a creature native and endued
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
To muddy death.
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.
But that this folly drowns it.	
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Now fear I this will give it start again.
Therefore, let's follow.
Christian burial.
Christian burial.
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,
Whose grave's this, sirrah?
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
Fortinbras.
Whose do you think it was?
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the
King's jester.
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.
Couch we awhile and mark.	
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of bell and burial.
Must there no more be done?
We should profane the service of the dead
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
As to peace-parted souls.
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
When thou liest howling.
And not have strewed thy grave.
Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
Of blue Olympus.
What is he whose grief
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane.
The devil take thy soul!
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!
Could not with all their quantity of love
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear
Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
Anon, as patient as the female dove
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
His silence will sit drooping.
What is the reason that you use me thus?
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
We'll put the matter to the present push.--
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--
This grave shall have a living monument.
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
You do remember all the circumstance?
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--
And praised be rashness for it: let us know,
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will--
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
My head should be struck off.
Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
Th' effect of what I wrote?
An earnest conjuration from the King,
As England was his faithful tributary,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriving time allowed.
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
Thou knowest already.
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
Does by their own insinuation grow.
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites.
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
Popped in between th' election and my hopes,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect
To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be
To let this canker of our nature come
In further evil?
It must be shortly known to him from England
What is the issue of the business there.
It will be short. The interim's mine,
And a man's life's no more than to say "one."
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
For by the image of my cause I see
The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a tow'ring passion.
Denmark.
Dost know this waterfly?
Osric to put on his hat.]
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
With a sore distraction. What I have done
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
Sir, in this audience
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
And hurt my brother.
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
Till by some elder masters of known honor
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
And will not wrong it.
And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--
Give us the foils. Come on.
Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
Stick fiery off indeed.
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
You know the wager?
Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.
This is too heavy. Let me see another.
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
Richer than that which four successive kings
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
Here's to thy health.
Give him the cup.
Come.  Another hit. What say you?
Our son shall win.
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.
My lord, I'll hit him now.
And yet it is almost against my conscience.
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
How does the Queen?
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	
Treachery! Seek it out.
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
No med'cine in the world can do thee good.
In thee there is not half an hour's life.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
Follow my mother.	
It is a poison tempered by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
Nor thine on me.	
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--
But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
To the unsatisfied.
Here's yet some liquor left.	
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
To tell my story.
What warlike noise is this?
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
To th' ambassadors of England gives
This warlike volley.
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
But I do prophesy th' election lights
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
Which have solicited--the rest is silence.
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
Why does the drum come hither?
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
That thou so many princes at a shot
So bloodily hast struck?
And our affairs from England come too late.
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
Where should we have our thanks?
Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
He never gave commandment for their death.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
Truly deliver.
And call the noblest to the audience.
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
But let this same be presently performed
Even while men's minds are wild, lest more
On plots and errors happen.
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on,
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
The soldier's music and the rite of war
Speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
Therefore, paucas pallabris, let the world
Huntsman, I charge thee tender well my hounds.
Breathe Merriman 
And couple Clowder with the deep-mouthed brach.
Saw'st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good
At the hedge corner, in the coldest fault?
Why, Bellman is as good as he, my lord.
He cried upon it at the merest loss,
And twice today picked out the dullest scent.
Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
Thou art a fool. If Echo were as fleet,
But sup them well, and look unto them all.
Tomorrow I intend to hunt again.
What's here? One dead, or drunk? See doth he
He breathes, my lord. Were he not warmed with ale,
This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
Sirs, I will practice on this drunken man.
What think you, if he were conveyed to bed,
Wrapped in sweet clothes, rings put upon his
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Would not the beggar then forget himself?
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.
Even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy.
Then take him up, and manage well the jest.
Carry him gently to my fairest chamber,
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures;
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters,
And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet;
Procure me music ready when he wakes
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound.
And if he chance to speak, be ready straight
And, with a low, submissive reverence,
Say "What is it your Honor will command?"
Let one attend him with a silver basin
Full of rosewater and bestrewed with flowers,
Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
And say "Will 't please your Lordship cool your
Someone be ready with a costly suit,
And ask him what apparel he will wear.
Another tell him of his hounds and horse,
And that his lady mourns at his disease.
Persuade him that he hath been lunatic,
And when he says he is, say that he dreams,
For he is nothing but a mighty lord.
This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs.
It will be pastime passing excellent
If it be husbanded with modesty.
My lord, I warrant you we will play our part
As he shall think by our true diligence
He is no less than what we say he is.
Take him up gently, and to bed with him,
And each one to his office when he wakes.
Sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds.
Belike some noble gentleman that means
How now? Who is it?
That offer service to your Lordship.
Bid them come near.
Now, fellows, you are welcome.
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?
So please your Lordship to accept our duty.
With all my heart. This fellow I remember
Since once he played a farmer's eldest son.--
Was aptly fitted and naturally performed.
Well, you are come to me in happy time,
The rather for I have some sport in hand
Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
There is a lord will hear you play tonight;
But I am doubtful of your modesties,
Lest, over-eying of his odd behavior
You break into some merry passion,
And so offend him. For I tell you, sirs,
If you should smile, he grows impatient.
Fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselves
Were he the veriest antic in the world.
Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery
And give them friendly welcome every one.
Let them want nothing that my house affords.
Sirrah, go you to Bartholomew, my page,
And see him dressed in all suits like a lady.
That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber,
And call him "Madam," do him obeisance.
Tell him from me, as he will win my love,
He bear himself with honorable action,
Such as he hath observed in noble ladies
Unto their lords, by them accomplished.
Such duty to the drunkard let him do
With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,
And say "What is 't your Honor will command,
Wherein your lady and your humble wife
May show her duty and make known her love?"
And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,
And with declining head into his bosom,
Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed
To see her noble lord restored to health,
Who, for this seven years, hath esteemed him
No better than a poor and loathsome beggar.
And if the boy have not a woman's gift
To rain a shower of commanded tears,
An onion will do well for such a shift,
Which 
Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.
See this dispatched with all the haste thou canst.
Anon I'll give thee more instructions.
Voice, gait, and action of a gentlewoman.
And how my men will stay themselves from
When they do homage to this simple peasant,
May well abate the over-merry spleen
Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
Attendants, some with apparel, basin and ewer, and
Will 't please your Lord drink a cup of sack?
Will 't please your Honor taste of these conserves?
What raiment will your Honor wear today?
Ne'er ask me what raiment I'll wear, for I have no
Heaven cease this idle humor in your Honor!
Of such possessions, and so high esteem
Should be infused with so foul a spirit!
Sly, old Sly's son of Burton Heath, by birth a
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,
As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment,
And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.
Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
Each in his office ready at thy beck.
Wilt thou have music? Hark, Apollo plays,	
And twenty caged nightingales do sing.
Or wilt thou sleep? We'll have thee to a couch
Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed
On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis.
Say thou wilt walk, we will bestrew the ground.
Or wilt thou ride? Thy horses shall be trapped,
Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.
Dost thou love hawking? Thou hast hawks will soar
Above the morning lark. Or wilt thou hunt?
Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.
Say thou wilt course. Thy greyhounds are as swift
As breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.
Dost thou love pictures? We will fetch thee straight
Adonis painted by a running brook,
And Cytherea all in sedges hid,
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,
Even as the waving sedges play with wind.
We'll show thee Io as she was a maid
And how she was beguiled and surprised,
As lively painted as the deed was done.
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord;
Thou hast a lady far more beautiful
Than any woman in this waning age.
And till the tears that she hath shed for thee
Like envious floods o'errun her lovely face,
She was the fairest creature in the world--
And yet she is inferior to none.
Am I a lord, and have I such a lady?
Or do I dream? Or have I dreamed till now?
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed
And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight,
And once again a pot o' the smallest ale.
Will 't please your Mightiness to wash your hands?
These fifteen years you have been in a dream,
Or, when you waked, so waked as if you slept.
These fifteen years! By my fay, a goodly nap.
But did I never speak of all that time?
Oh, yes, my lord, but very idle words.
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,
Yet would you say you were beaten out of door,
And rail upon the hostess of the house,
And say you would present her at the leet
Because she brought stone jugs and no sealed
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
Why, sir, you know no house, nor no such maid,
Nor no such men as you have reckoned up,
As Stephen Sly and old John Naps of Greete,
And Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell,
And twenty more such names and men as these,
Which never were, nor no man ever saw.
Where is my wife?
Here, noble lord. What is thy will with her?
Are you my wife, and will not call me "husband"?
My men should call me "lord." I am your goodman.
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband,
Madam wife, they say that I have dreamed
And slept above some fifteen year or more.
Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,
Being all this time abandoned from your bed.
Madam, undress you, and come now to bed.
Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you
To pardon me yet for a night or two;
Or if not so, until the sun be set.
For your physicians have expressly charged,
In peril to incur your former malady,
That I should yet absent me from your bed.
Your Honor's players, hearing your amendment,
Are come to play a pleasant comedy,
For so your doctors hold it very meet,
Seeing too much sadness hath congealed your
And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy.
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
Is not a comonty a Christmas gambold or a tumbling
No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.
Tranio, since for the great desire I had
To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,
The pleasant garden of great Italy,
And by my father's love and leave am armed
With his goodwill and thy good company.
My trusty servant well approved in all,
Here let us breathe and haply institute
Pisa, renowned for grave citizens,
Gave me my being, and my father first,
Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii.
Vincentio's son, brought up in Florence,
It shall become to serve all hopes conceived
To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds.
And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study
Virtue, and that part of philosophy
Will I apply that treats of happiness
By virtue specially to be achieved.
Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa left
And am to Padua come, as he that leaves
And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.
Mi perdonato, gentle master mine.
Glad that you thus continue your resolve
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
Only, good master, while we do admire
This virtue and this moral discipline,
Let's be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray,
Or so devote to Aristotle's checks
As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured.
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have,
And practice rhetoric in your common talk;
Music and poesy use to quicken you;
The mathematics and the metaphysics--
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.
No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en.
In brief, sir, study what you most affect.
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.
If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,
We could at once put us in readiness
And take a lodging fit to entertain
Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.
Bianca; Gremio, a pantaloon, and Hortensio, suitors
But stay awhile! What company is this?
Master, some show to welcome us to town.
Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
For how I firmly am resolved you know:
That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter
Before I have a husband for the elder.
If either of you both love Katherine,
Because I know you well and love you well,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
To cart her, rather. She's too rough for me.--
There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?
To make a stale of me amongst these mates?
Unless you were of gentler, milder mold.
Iwis it is not halfway to her heart.
But if it were, doubt not her care should be
To comb your noddle with a three-legged stool
And paint your face and use you like a fool.
From all such devils, good Lord, deliver us!
Husht, master, here's some good pastime toward;
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
But in the other's silence do I see
Maid's mild behavior and sobriety.
Peace, Tranio.
Well said, master. Mum, and gaze your fill.
Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
What I have said--Bianca, get you in,
And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
Put finger in the eye, an she knew why.
Sister, content you in my discontent.--
Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe.
My books and instruments shall be my company,
On them to look and practice by myself.
Hark, Tranio, thou mayst hear Minerva speak!
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?
Sorry am I that our goodwill effects
Bianca's grief.
Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell,
And make her bear the penance of her tongue?
Gentlemen, content you. I am resolved.--
Go in, Bianca.	
And for I know she taketh most delight
In music, instruments, and poetry,
Schoolmasters will I keep within my house
Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,
Or, Signior Gremio, you know any such,
Prefer them hither. For to cunning men
To mine own children in good bringing up.
And so, farewell.--Katherine, you may stay,
For I have more to commune with Bianca.	
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not?
What, shall I be appointed hours as though, belike,
Happy man be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the
Tranio and Lucentio remain onstage.]
That love should of a sudden take such hold?
But see, while idly I stood looking on,
And now in plainness do confess to thee
That art to me as secret and as dear
As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was:
Tranio, I burn, I pine! I perish, Tranio,
If I achieve not this young modest girl.
Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst.
Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
Master, it is no time to chide you now.
Affection is not rated from the heart.
If love have touched you, naught remains but so:
Redime te captum quam queas minimo.
Gramercies, lad. Go forward. This contents;
The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.
Master, you looked so longly on the maid,
Perhaps you marked not what's the pith of all.
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand
When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strand.
Saw you no more? Marked you not how her sister
Began to scold and raise up such a storm
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move,
And with her breath she did perfume the air.
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.
Nay, then 'tis time to stir him from his trance.--
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it
Her elder sister is so curst and shrewd
That till the father rid his hands of her,
Master, your love must live a maid at home,
And therefore has he closely mewed her up,
Because she will not be annoyed with suitors.
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he!
But art thou not advised he took some care
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
Ay, marry, am I, sir--and now 'tis plotted!
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
Tell me thine first.
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
That's your device.
Not possible. For who shall bear your part
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son,
Keep house, and ply his book, welcome his friends,
Visit his countrymen and banquet them?
Basta, content thee, for I have it full.
We have not yet been seen in any house,
Nor can we be distinguished by our faces
For man or master. Then it follows thus:
Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,
Keep house, and port, and servants, as I should.
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
Uncase thee. Take my colored hat and cloak.
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee,
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient
Although I think 'twas in another sense),
Because so well I love Lucentio.
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves,
And let me be a slave, t' achieve that maid
Whose sudden sight hath thralled my wounded eye.
Here comes the rogue.--Sirrah, where have you
Where have I been? Nay, how now, where are you?
Master, has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes?
Or you stolen his? Or both? Pray, what's the news?
Sirrah, come hither. 'Tis no time to jest,
And therefore frame your manners to the time.
Your fellow, Tranio here, to save my life,
Puts my apparel and my count'nance on,
And I for my escape have put on his;
For in a quarrel since I came ashore
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
While I make way from hence to save my life.
You understand me?
And not a jot of "Tranio" in your mouth.
Tranio is changed into Lucentio.
The better for him. Would I were so too.
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest
But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master's, I
You use your manners discreetly in all kind of
When I am alone, why then I am Tranio;
But in all places else, your master Lucentio.
My lord, you nod. You do not mind the play.
Comes there any more of it?
Would 'twere done.
Verona, for a while I take my leave
To see my friends in Padua, but of all
My best beloved and approved friend,
Hortensio. And I trow this is his house.
Here, sirrah Grumio, knock, I say.
Villain, I say, knock me at this gate
And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate.
My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock
And then I know after who comes by the worst.
Faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock, I'll ring it.
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
Con tutto il cuore ben trovato, may I say.
Latin. If this be not a lawful cause for me to leave
Whom, would to God, I had well knocked at first,
Then had not Grumio come by the worst.
And could not get him for my heart to do it.
Sirrah, begone, or talk not, I advise you.
Petruchio, patience. I am Grumio's pledge.
Why, this' a heavy chance 'twixt him and you,
Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.
And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?
Such wind as scatters young men through the world
To seek their fortunes farther than at home,
Where small experience grows. But in a few,
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:
Antonio, my father, is deceased,
And I have thrust myself into this maze,
Happily to wive and thrive, as best I may.
Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home,
And so am come abroad to see the world.
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favored wife?
Thou 'dst thank me but a little for my counsel--
And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich,
And very rich. But thou 'rt too much my friend,
And I'll not wish thee to her.
Signior Hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we
Few words suffice. And therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife
Be she as foul as was Florentius' love,
As old as Sibyl, and as curst and shrewd
As Socrates' Xanthippe, or a worse,
She moves me not, or not removes at least
Affection's edge in me, were she as rough
As are the swelling Adriatic seas.
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
Petruchio, since we are stepped thus far in,
With wealth enough, and young and beauteous,
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman.
Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
Is that she is intolerable curst,
And shrewd, and froward, so beyond all measure
That, were my state far worser than it is,
Hortensio, peace. Thou know'st not gold's effect.
Tell me her father's name, and 'tis enough;
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
Her father is Baptista Minola,
An affable and courteous gentleman.
Her name is Katherina Minola,
Renowned in Padua for her scolding tongue.
And he knew my deceased father well.
And therefore let me be thus bold with you
To give you over at this first encounter--
Unless you will accompany me thither.
You know him not, sir.
Tarry, Petruchio. I must go with thee,
For in Baptista's keep my treasure is.
He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca,
And her withholds from me and other more,
Suitors to her and rivals in my love,
Supposing it a thing impossible,
For those defects I have before rehearsed,
That ever Katherina will be wooed.
Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en,
That none shall have access unto Bianca
Till Katherine the curst have got a husband.
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace
And offer me disguised in sober robes
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca,
That so I may, by this device at least,
Have leave and leisure to make love to her
And unsuspected court her by herself.
Master, master, look about you. Who goes there, ha?
Peace, Grumio, it is the rival of my love.
Petruchio, stand by awhile.
Hark you, sir, I'll have them very fairly bound,
All books of love. See that at any hand,
And see you read no other lectures to her.
You understand me. Over and beside
Signior Baptista's liberality,
And let me have them very well perfumed,
For she is sweeter than perfume itself
To whom they go to. What will you read to her?
Whate'er I read to her, I'll plead for you
As for my patron, stand you so assured,
As firmly as yourself were still in place,
Yea, and perhaps with more successful words
Than you--unless you were a scholar, sir.
Grumio, mum.	
God save you, Signior Gremio.
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca,
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man, for learning and behavior
Fit for her turn, well read in poetry
And other books--good ones, I warrant you.
Hath promised me to help me to another,
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.
Beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.
Gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love.
Listen to me, and if you speak me fair
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
Upon agreement from us to his liking,
Will undertake to woo curst Katherine,
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.
No? Sayst me so, friend? What countryman?
Born in Verona, old Antonio's son.
My father dead, my fortune lives for me,
And I do hope good days and long to see.
Oh, sir, such a life with such a wife were strange.
But if you have a stomach, to 't, i' God's name!
You shall have me assisting you in all.
But will you woo this wildcat?
Will he woo her? Ay, or I'll hang her.
Why came I hither but to that intent?
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
Have I not in my time heard lions roar?
Have I not heard the sea, puffed up with winds,
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field
And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard
Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets clang?
And do you tell me of a woman's tongue,
That gives not half so great a blow to hear
As will a chestnut in a farmer's fire?
Tush, tush, fear boys with bugs!
This gentleman is happily arrived,
My mind presumes, for his own good and yours.
And bear his charge of wooing whatsoe'er.
And so we will, provided that he win her.
Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold,
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
Hark you, sir, you mean not her to--
Perhaps him and her, sir. What have you to do?
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.
Well begun, Tranio.
Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
An if I be, sir, is it any offense?
No, if without more words you will get you hence.
Why sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
For me, as for you?
For what reason, I beseech you?
For this reason, if you'll know:
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.
That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
Softly, my masters. If you be gentlemen,
Do me this right: hear me with patience.
Baptista is a noble gentleman
To whom my father is not all unknown,
And were his daughter fairer than she is,
She may more suitors have, and me for one.
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers.
Then well one more may fair Bianca have.
And so she shall. Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
What, this gentleman will out-talk us all!
Sir, give him head; I know he'll prove a jade.
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Did you yet ever see Baptista's daughter?
No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two,
The one as famous for a scolding tongue
As is the other for beauteous modesty.
Sir, sir, the first's for me; let her go by.
Yea, leave that labor to great Hercules,
And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.
Sir, understand you this of me, in sooth:
The youngest daughter, whom you hearken for,
Her father keeps from all access of suitors
And will not promise her to any man
Until the elder sister first be wed.
The younger then is free, and not before.
If it be so, sir, that you are the man
Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest,
And if you break the ice and do this feat,
Achieve the elder, set the younger free
For our access, whose hap shall be to have her
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
Sir, you say well, and well you do conceive.
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
To whom we all rest generally beholding.
Sir, I shall not be slack; in sign whereof,
Please you we may contrive this afternoon
And quaff carouses to our mistress' health,
And do as adversaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
The motion's good indeed, and be it so.--
Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.
Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me.
That I disdain. But for these other goods--
Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
Yea, all my raiment to my petticoat,
Or what you will command me will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.
Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tell
Whom thou lov'st best. See thou dissemble not.
Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
Which I could fancy more than any other.
Minion, thou liest. Is 't not Hortensio?
If you affect him, sister, here I swear
You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay, then, you jest, and now I well perceive
You have but jested with me all this while.
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.
Why, how now, dame, whence grows this
Bianca, stand aside.--Poor girl, she weeps!
Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
Her silence flouts me, and I'll be revenged!
What, in my sight?--Bianca, get thee in.
What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see
She is your treasure, she must have a husband,
And, for your love to her, lead apes in hell.
Talk not to me. I will go sit and weep
Till I can find occasion of revenge.	
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?
But who comes here?
Hortensio disguised as Litio; and Tranio disguised
And you, good sir. Pray, have you not a daughter
Called Katherina, fair and virtuous?
You are too blunt. Go to it orderly.
You wrong me, Signior Gremio. Give me leave.--
That hearing of her beauty and her wit,
Her affability and bashful modesty,
Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,
Am bold to show myself a forward guest
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
Of that report which I so oft have heard,
And, for an entrance to my entertainment,
Cunning in music and the mathematics,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant.
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong.
His name is Litio, born in Mantua.
You're welcome, sir, and he for your good sake.
But for my daughter Katherine, this I know,
She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
Or else you like not of my company.
Mistake me not. I speak but as I find.
Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?
Petruchio is my name, Antonio's son,
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray
Let us that are poor petitioners speak too!
Bacare, you are marvelous forward.
Lucentio, disguised as Cambio] that hath
Latin, and other languages as the other in music and
Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,
That being a stranger in this city here
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This liberty is all that I request,
That, upon knowledge of my parentage,
And free access and favor as the rest.
And toward the education of your daughters
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books.
If you accept them, then their worth is great.
Lucentio is your name. Of whence, I pray?
Of Pisa, sir, son to Vincentio.
You shall go see your pupils presently.
Holla, within!
Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
To my daughters, and tell them both
These are their tutors. Bid them use them well.
We will go walk a little in the orchard,
And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
And every day I cannot come to woo.
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
Which I have bettered rather than decreased.
Then tell me, if I get your daughter's love,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
After my death, the one half of my lands,
And, in possession, twenty thousand crowns.
And, for that dowry, I'll assure her of
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,
In all my lands and leases whatsoever.
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,
That covenants may be kept on either hand.
Ay, when the special thing is well obtained,
That is, her love, for that is all in all.
Why, that is nothing. For I tell you, father,
And where two raging fires meet together,
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury.
Though little fire grows great with little wind,
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all.
So I to her and so she yields to me,
For I am rough and woo not like a babe.
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed.
But be thou armed for some unhappy words.
Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds,
That shakes not, though they blow perpetually.
How now, my friend, why dost thou look so pale?
For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?
Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
Why, no, for she hath broke the lute to me.
And bowed her hand to teach her fingering,
When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
And with that word she struck me on the head,
And through the instrument my pate made way,
And there I stood amazed for a while,
As on a pillory, looking through the lute,
While she did call me "rascal fiddler,"
And "twangling Jack," with twenty such vile terms,
As had she studied to misuse me so.
Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench.
Well, go with me, and be not so discomfited.
Proceed in practice with my younger daughter.
She's apt to learn, and thankful for good turns.--
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?
And woo her with some spirit when she comes!
Say that she rail, why then I'll tell her plain
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale.
Say that she frown, I'll say she looks as clear
As morning roses newly washed with dew.
Say she be mute and will not speak a word,
Then I'll commend her volubility
And say she uttereth piercing eloquence.
If she do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks
As though she bid me stay by her a week.
If she deny to wed, I'll crave the day
When I shall ask the banns, and when be married.
But here she comes--and now, Petruchio, speak.
Good morrow, Kate, for that's your name, I hear.
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing.
They call me Katherine that do talk of me.
You lie, in faith, for you are called plain Kate,
And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst.
But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom,
Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation:
Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,
Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded
Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.
Remove you hence. I knew you at the first
You were a movable.
Why, what's a movable?
Thou hast hit it. Come, sit on me.
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.
Women are made to bear, and so are you.
No such jade as you, if me you mean.
Alas, good Kate, I will not burden thee,
For knowing thee to be but young and light--
Too light for such a swain as you to catch,
And yet as heavy as my weight should be.
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
Come, come, you wasp! I' faith, you are too angry.
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.
My remedy is then to pluck it out.
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.
Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting?
In his tail.
Yours, if you talk of tales, and so farewell.
Nay, come again, good Kate. I am a gentleman--
If you strike me, you are no gentleman,
And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
No cock of mine. You crow too like a craven.
Nay, come, Kate, come. You must not look so sour.
It is my fashion when I see a crab.
Why, here's no crab, and therefore look not sour.
Then show it me.
Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.
Yet you are withered.
Nay, hear you, Kate--in sooth, you 'scape not so.
No, not a whit. I find you passing gentle.
And now I find report a very liar.
For thou art pleasant, gamesome, passing
But slow in speech, yet sweet as springtime flowers.
Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance,
Nor bite the lip as angry wenches will,
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk.
But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers,
With gentle conference, soft, and affable.
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
Is straight, and slender, and as brown in hue
As hazelnuts, and sweeter than the kernels.
Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.
Did ever Dian so become a grove
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful.
Where did you study all this goodly speech?
It is extempore, from my mother wit.
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy bed.
And therefore, setting all this chat aside,
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
That you shall be my wife, your dowry 'greed on,
And, will you, nill you, I will marry you.
Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn,
For by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,
Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,
Thou must be married to no man but me.
For I am he am born to tame you, Kate,
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other household Kates.
Here comes your father. Never make denial.
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my
It were impossible I should speed amiss.
Why, how now, daughter Katherine? In your
Call you me daughter? Now I promise you
You have showed a tender fatherly regard,
To wish me wed to one half lunatic,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world
That talked of her have talked amiss of her.
If she be curst, it is for policy,
For she's not froward, but modest as the dove;
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn.
For patience she will prove a second Grissel,
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity.
And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together
That upon Sunday is the wedding day.
Be patient, gentlemen. I choose her for myself.
If she and I be pleased, what's that to you?
That she shall still be curst in company.
How much she loves me. O, the kindest Kate!
She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
That in a twink she won me to her love.
How tame, when men and women are alone,
Give me thy hand, Kate. I will unto Venice
To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding day.--
Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests.
God send you joy, Petruchio. 'Tis a match.
Amen, say we. We will be witnesses.
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu.
We will have rings, and things, and fine array,
And kiss me, Kate. We will be married o' Sunday.
Was ever match clapped up so suddenly?
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part
And venture madly on a desperate mart.
The gain I seek, is quiet in the match.
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter.
Now is the day we long have looked for.
And I am one that love Bianca more
Than words can witness or your thoughts can guess.
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.
Graybeard, thy love doth freeze.
Skipper, stand back. 'Tis age that nourisheth.
But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
Content you, gentlemen. I will compound this strife.
That can assure my daughter greatest dower
Shall have my Bianca's love.
Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her?
First, as you know, my house within the city
Is richly furnished with plate and gold,
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
In ivory coffers I have stuffed my crowns,
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
Fine linen, Turkey cushions bossed with pearl,
Valance of Venice gold in needlework,
Pewter and brass, and all things that belongs
To house or housekeeping. Then, at my farm
Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls,
And all things answerable to this portion.
Myself am struck in years, I must confess,
And if I die tomorrow this is hers,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.
That "only" came well in.  Sir, list to
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
Within rich Pisa walls, as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua,
Besides two thousand ducats by the year
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.--
What, have I pinched you, Signior Gremio?
Two thousand ducats by the year of land?
That she shall have, besides an argosy
That now is lying in Marcellus' road.
Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
Than three great argosies, besides two galliasses
And twelve tight galleys. These I will assure her,
And twice as much whate'er thou off'rest next.
Nay, I have offered all. I have no more,
And she can have no more than all I have.
Why, then, the maid is mine from all the world,
By your firm promise. Gremio is outvied.
And, let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own; else, you must pardon me.
If you should die before him, where's her dower?
That's but a cavil. He is old, I young.
And may not young men die as well as old?
Well, gentlemen, I am thus resolved:
On Sunday next, you know
My daughter Katherine is to be married.
Be bride to you, if you make this assurance.
If not, to Signior Gremio.
And so I take my leave, and thank you both.
Adieu, good neighbor.	
Now I fear thee not.
Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
To give thee all and in his waning age
Set foot under thy table. Tut, a toy!
An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.
Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.
Must get a father, called "supposed Vincentio"--
And that's a wonder. Fathers commonly
Do get their children. But in this case of wooing,
Bianca.]
Fiddler, forbear. You grow too forward, sir.
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
Her sister Katherine welcomed you withal?
The patroness of heavenly harmony.
Then give me leave to have prerogative,
And when in music we have spent an hour,
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
Preposterous ass, that never read so far
To know the cause why music was ordained.
Was it not to refresh the mind of man
After his studies or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read philosophy,
And, while I pause, serve in your harmony.
Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong
To strive for that which resteth in my choice.
But learn my lessons as I please myself.
And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down.
His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
That will be never.  Tune your
Hic ibat Simois, hic est Sigeia tellus,
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.
Lucentio, hic est, son unto Vincentio of Pisa,
Sigeia tellus, disguised thus to get your love, Hic
Priami, is my man Tranio, regia, bearing my port,
Simois, I know you not; hic est Sigeia tellus, I trust
Madam, 'tis now in tune.	
The bass is right. 'Tis the base knave that jars.
Now for my life the knave doth court my love!
Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet.
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
Mistrust it not, for sure Aeacides
Was Ajax, called so from his grandfather.
But let it rest.--Now, Litio, to you.
Good master, take it not unkindly, pray,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
You may go walk, and give me leave awhile.
My lessons make no music in three parts.
Are you so formal, sir? Well, I must wait
Our fine musician groweth amorous.
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
To learn the order of my fingering
To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
More pleasant, pithy, and effectual
Than hath been taught by any of my trade.
And there it is in writing fairly drawn.
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.
Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.
Call you this "gamut"? Tut, I like it not.
Old fashions please me best. I am not so nice
To change true rules for odd inventions.
Mistress, your father prays you leave your books
And help to dress your sister's chamber up.
You know tomorrow is the wedding day.
Farewell, sweet masters both. I must be gone.
Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
But I have cause to pry into this pedant.
Methinks he looks as though he were in love.
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
To cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale,
Seize thee that list! If once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
Bianca, Lucentio as Cambio, and others, Attendants.]
Signior Lucentio, this is the 'pointed day
That Katherine and Petruchio should be married,
And yet we hear not of our son-in-law.
What will be said? What mockery will it be,
To want the bridegroom when the priest attends
To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage?
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
No shame but mine. I must, forsooth, be forced
To give my hand, opposed against my heart,
Unto a mad-brain rudesby, full of spleen,
Who wooed in haste and means to wed at leisure.
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior,
And, to be noted for a merry man,
He'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
Make friends, invite, and proclaim the banns,
Yet never means to wed where he hath wooed.
Now must the world point at poor Katherine
And say "Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
If it would please him come and marry her."
Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too.
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
Whatever fortune stays him from his word.
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;
Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.
Would Katherine had never seen him, though!
Go, girl. I cannot blame thee now to weep,
For such an injury would vex a very saint,
Much more a shrew of thy impatient humor.
Is it new and old too? How may that be?
What then?
When he stands where I am, and sees you there.
Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-appareled.
Come, where be these gallants? Who's at home?
Were it better I should rush in thus--
But where is Kate? Where is my lovely bride?
How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown.
And wherefore gaze this goodly company
As if they saw some wondrous monument,
Some comet or unusual prodigy?
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding day.
First were we sad, fearing you would not come,
Now sadder that you come so unprovided.
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
An eyesore to our solemn festival.
And tell us what occasion of import
Hath all so long detained you from your wife
And sent you hither so unlike yourself.
Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear.
Sufficeth I am come to keep my word,
Though in some part enforced to digress,
Which at more leisure I will so excuse
As you shall well be satisfied with all.
But where is Kate? I stay too long from her.
The morning wears. 'Tis time we were at church.
See not your bride in these unreverent robes.
Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
Not I, believe me. Thus I'll visit her.
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
Good sooth, even thus. Therefore, ha' done with
To me she's married, not unto my clothes.
Could I repair what she will wear in me,
As I can change these poor accoutrements,
But what a fool am I to chat with you
When I should bid good morrow to my bride
And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
He hath some meaning in his mad attire.
We will persuade him, be it possible,
To put on better ere he go to church.
But, sir, to love concerneth us to add
Her father's liking, which to bring to pass,
As I before imparted to your Worship,
It skills not much, we'll fit him to our turn),
And he shall be "Vincentio of Pisa,"
And make assurance here in Padua
Of greater sums than I have promised.
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster
Doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly,
Which, once performed, let all the world say no,
That by degrees we mean to look into,
And watch our vantage in this business.
We'll overreach the graybeard, Gremio,
The narrow prying father, Minola,
The quaint musician, amorous Litio,
All for my master's sake, Lucentio.
Signior Gremio, came you from the church?
As willingly as e'er I came from school.
And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
Curster than she? Why, 'tis impossible.
Why, he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.
Tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool to him.
Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,
That, all amazed, the priest let fall the book,
And as he stooped again to take it up,
This mad-brained bridegroom took him such a cuff
That down fell priest and book, and book and priest.
What said the wench when he rose again?
Trembled and shook, for why he stamped and swore
As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
But after many ceremonies done,
He calls for wine. "A health!" quoth he, as if
He had been aboard, carousing to his mates
After a storm; quaffed off the muscatel
And threw the sops all in the sexton's face,
Having no other reason
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly,
And seemed to ask him sops as he was drinking.
This done, he took the bride about the neck
And kissed her lips with such a clamorous smack
That at the parting all the church did echo.
And I, seeing this, came thence for very shame,
And after me I know the rout is coming.
Such a mad marriage never was before!	
Hark, hark, I hear the minstrels play.
Grumio, and Attendants.]
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains.
And have prepared great store of wedding cheer,
But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
Is 't possible you will away tonight?
Make it no wonder. If you knew my business,
You would entreat me rather go than stay.
And, honest company, I thank you all,
That have beheld me give away myself
To this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife.
Dine with my father, drink a health to me,
For I must hence, and farewell to you all.
Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
Now, if you love me, stay.
Do what thou canst, I will not go today,
No, nor tomorrow, not till I please myself.
The door is open, sir. There lies your way.
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green.
For me, I'll not be gone till I please myself.
That take it on you at the first so roundly.
Father, be quiet. He shall stay my leisure.
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner.
If she had not a spirit to resist.
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.--
Obey the bride, you that attend on her.
Go to the feast, revel and domineer,
Carouse full measure to her maidenhead,
Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves.
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;
She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house,
My household stuff, my field, my barn,
My horse, my ox, my ass, my anything.
And here she stands, touch her whoever dare.
That stops my way in Padua.--Grumio,
Draw forth thy weapon. We are beset with thieves.
Rescue thy mistress if thou be a man!--
Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee,
Kate.
Nay, let them go. A couple of quiet ones!
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
Of all mad matches never was the like.
Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
That being mad herself, she's madly mated.
Neighbors and friends, though bride and
For to supply the places at the table,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
And let Bianca take her sister's room.
Shall sweet Bianca practice how to bride it?
She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let's go.
Walter, Sugarsop, and the rest. Let their heads
Are they all ready?
Now, my spruce companions, is all ready and all
Where be these knaves? What, no man at door
To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse?
Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Phillip?
You loggerheaded and unpolished grooms.
What? No attendance? No regard? No duty?
Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
Here, sir, as foolish as I was before.
You peasant swain, you whoreson malt-horse
Did I not bid thee meet me in the park
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,
And Gabriel's pumps were all unpinked i' th' heel.
There was no link to color Peter's hat,
And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing.
There were none fine but Adam, Rafe, and Gregory.
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly.
Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in!
Sit down, Kate, and welcome.
Soud, soud, soud, soud!
Why, when, I say?--Nay, good sweet Kate, be
Off with my boots, you rogues, you villains! When?
Out, you rogue! You pluck my foot awry.
Take that!	
And mend the plucking of the other.--
Be merry, Kate.--Some water here! What ho!
Where's my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence
And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither.
One, Kate, that you must kiss and be acquainted
Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?--
Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.--
You whoreson villain, will you let it fall?
Patience, I pray you, 'twas a fault unwilling.
Come, Kate, sit down. I know you have a stomach.
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?--
What's this? Mutton?
What dogs are these? Where is the rascal cook?
How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser
And serve it thus to me that love it not?
There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all!
You heedless joltheads and unmannered slaves!
What, do you grumble? I'll be with you straight.
The meat was well, if you were so contented.
And I expressly am forbid to touch it,
For it engenders choler, planteth anger,
And better 'twere that both of us did fast
Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.
Be patient. Tomorrow 't shall be mended,
And for this night we'll fast for company.
Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
Making a sermon of continency to her,
And rails and swears and rates, that she 
Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,
And sits as one new-risen from a dream.
Away, away, for he is coming hither!
Thus have I politicly begun my reign,
And 'tis my hope to end successfully.
My falcon now is sharp and passing empty,
And, till she stoop, she must not be full-gorged,
For then she never looks upon her lure.
Another way I have to man my haggard,
To make her come and know her keeper's call.
That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites
That bate and beat and will not be obedient.
She ate no meat today, nor none shall eat.
Last night she slept not, nor tonight she shall not.
As with the meat, some undeserved fault
And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,
This way the coverlet, another way the sheets.
Ay, and amid this hurly I intend
That all is done in reverend care of her.
And, in conclusion, she shall watch all night,
And, if she chance to nod, I'll rail and brawl,
And with the clamor keep her still awake.
This is a way to kill a wife with kindness.
And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humor.
He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
Now let him speak; 'tis charity to shew.
Is 't possible, friend Litio, that mistress Bianca
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
Stand by, and mark the manner of his teaching.
Now mistress, profit you in what you read?
What, master, read you? First resolve me that.
And may you prove, sir, master of your art.
While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart.
Quick proceeders, marry! Now tell me, I pray,
You that durst swear that your mistress Bianca
Loved none in the world so well as Lucentio.
Mistake no more. I am not Litio,
Nor a musician as I seem to be,
But one that scorn to live in this disguise
For such a one as leaves a gentleman
And makes a god of such a cullion.
Know, sir, that I am called Hortensio.
Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
Of your entire affection to Bianca,
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
Forswear Bianca and her love forever.
See how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio,
Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
Never to woo her more, but do forswear her
As one unworthy all the former favors
That I have fondly flattered her withal.
And here I take the like unfeigned oath,
Never to marry with her, though she would entreat.
Fie on her, see how beastly she doth court him!
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,
Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me
As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard.
And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.
Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
Shall win my love, and so I take my leave,
In resolution as I swore before.
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio.
Tranio, you jest. But have you both forsworn me?
Mistress, we have.
That shall be wooed and wedded in a day.
Ay, and he'll tame her.
Faith, he is gone unto the taming school.
The taming school? What, is there such a place?
Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master,
That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long
To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.
That I am dog-weary, but at last I spied
An ancient angel coming down the hill
Will serve the turn.
Master, a marcantant, or a pedant,
In gait and countenance surely like a father.
If he be credulous, and trust my tale,
And give assurance to Baptista Minola
As if he were the right Vincentio.
Take in your love, and then let me alone.
God save you, sir.
Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
Sir, at the farthest for a week or two,
But then up farther, and as far as Rome,
And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.
What countryman, I pray?
Of Mantua, sir? Marry, God forbid!
And come to Padua, careless of your life?
My life, sir? How, I pray? For that goes hard.
To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?
Your ships are stayed at Venice, and the Duke,
For private quarrel 'twixt your duke and him,
Hath published and proclaimed it openly.
You might have heard it else proclaimed about.
Alas, sir, it is worse for me than so,
For I have bills for money by exchange
From Florence, and must here deliver them.
Well, sir, to do you courtesy,
This will I do, and this I will advise you.
First tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,
Pisa renowned for grave citizens.
Among them know you one Vincentio?
He is my father, sir, and sooth to say,
In count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.
To save your life in this extremity,
This favor will I do you for his sake
That you are like to Sir Vincentio):
His name and credit shall you undertake,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodged.
Look that you take upon you as you should.
You understand me, sir. So shall you stay
Till you have done your business in the city.
If this be court'sy, sir, accept of it.
The patron of my life and liberty.
Then go with me, to make the matter good.
This, by the way, I let you understand:
My father is here looked for every day
To pass assurance of a dower in marriage
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you.
Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.
No, no, forsooth, I dare not for my life.
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears.
What, did he marry me to famish me?
Beggars that come unto my father's door
Upon entreaty have a present alms.
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity.
But I, who never knew how to entreat,
Nor never needed that I should entreat,
Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,
With oaths kept waking and with brawling fed.
And that which spites me more than all these wants,
He does it under name of perfect love,
As who should say, if I should sleep or eat
How say you to a fat tripe finely broiled?
What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.
Nay then, I will not. You shall have the mustard
Or else you get no beef of Grumio.
Then both, or one, or any thing thou wilt.
Why then, the mustard without the beef.
Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
That feed'st me with the very name of meat.
Sorrow on thee, and all the pack of you
That triumph thus upon my misery.
Go, get thee gone, I say.
How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?
Mistress, what cheer?
Pluck up thy spirits. Look cheerfully upon me.
Here, love, thou seest how diligent I am,
To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee.
What, not a word? Nay then, thou lov'st it not,
And all my pains is sorted to no proof.
Here, take away this dish.
The poorest service is repaid with thanks,
And so shall mine before you touch the meat.
Signior Petruchio, fie, you are to blame.
Come, Mistress Kate, I'll bear you company.
Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me.--
Much good do it unto thy gentle heart.
Kate, eat apace.
And now, my honey love,
Will we return unto thy father's house
And revel it as bravely as the best,
With silken coats and caps and golden rings,
With ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things,
With scarves and fans and double change of brav'ry,
With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry.
What, hast thou dined? The tailor stays thy leisure
To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.
Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments.
Lay forth the gown.
What news with you, sir?
Here is the cap your Worship did bespeak.
Why, this was molded on a porringer!
Why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut shell,
Away with it! Come, let me have a bigger.
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
And not till then.
Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak,
And speak I will. I am no child, no babe.
Your betters have endured me say my mind,
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
Or else my heart, concealing it, will break,
And, rather than it shall, I will be free
Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.
Why, thou sayst true. It is a paltry cap,
Love me, or love me not, I like the cap,
And it I will have, or I will have none.
Thy gown? Why, ay. Come, tailor, let us see 't.
What's this? A sleeve? 'Tis like a demi-cannon.
What, up and down carved like an apple tart?
Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,
Like to a censer in a barber's shop.
Why, what a devil's name, tailor, call'st thou this?
You bid me make it orderly and well,
According to the fashion and the time.
Marry, and did. But if you be remembered,
Go, hop me over every kennel home,
For you shall hop without my custom, sir.
More quaint, more pleasing, nor more
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
Why, true, he means to make a puppet of thee.
She says your Worship means to make a puppet of
Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail!
Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter cricket, thou!
Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread?
Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant,
Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv'st.
Your Worship is deceived. The gown is made
Just as my master had direction.
Grumio gave order how it should be done.
But how did you desire it should be made?
But did you not request to have it cut?
Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
Go, take it up unto thy master's use.
Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid.
Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow.
Take no unkindness of his hasty words.
Away, I say. Commend me to thy master.
Well, come, my Kate, we will unto your father's,
Even in these honest mean habiliments.
Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor,
For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich,
And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
So honor peereth in the meanest habit.
What, is the jay more precious than the lark
Because his feathers are more beautiful?
Or is the adder better than the eel
Because his painted skin contents the eye?
For this poor furniture and mean array.
If thou account'st it shame, lay it on me,
And therefore frolic! We will hence forthwith
To feast and sport us at thy father's house.
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end.
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot.
Let's see, I think 'tis now some seven o'clock,
And well we may come there by dinner time.
And 'twill be supper time ere you come there.
It shall be seven ere I go to horse.
Look what I speak, or do, or think to do,
You are still crossing it.--Sirs, let 't alone.
It shall be what o'clock I say it is.
Why, so, this gallant will command the sun!
Sir, this is the house. Please it you that I call?
Ay, what else? And but I be deceived,
Signior Baptista may remember me,
Near twenty years ago, in Genoa,
Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.
But, sir, here comes your boy.
Fear you not him.--Sirrah Biondello,
Now do your duty throughly, I advise you.
Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.
But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
And that you looked for him this day in Padua.
Thou 'rt a tall fellow. Hold thee that to drink.
Here comes Baptista. Set your countenance, sir.
Signior Baptista, you are happily met.--
Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of.
Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
Sir, by your leave, having come to Padua
To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
Of love between your daughter and himself.
And, for the good report I hear of you,
And for the love he beareth to your daughter
And she to him, to stay him not too long,
To have him matched. And if you please to like
No worse than I, upon some agreement
Me shall you find ready and willing
With one consent to have her so bestowed,
For curious I cannot be with you,
Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say.
Your plainness and your shortness please me well.
Right true it is your son Lucentio here
Doth love my daughter, and she loveth him,
Or both dissemble deeply their affections.
And therefore, if you say no more than this,
That like a father you will deal with him
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
The match is made, and all is done.
Your son shall have my daughter with consent.
We be affied and such assurance ta'en
As shall with either part's agreement stand?
Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants.
Besides, old Gremio is heark'ning still,
And happily we might be interrupted.
Then at my lodging, an it like you.
There doth my father lie, and there this night
We'll pass the business privately and well.
Send for your daughter by your servant here.
My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
The worst is this: that at so slender warning
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
It likes me well.--Cambio, hie you home,
And bid Bianca make her ready straight.
And, if you will, tell what hath happened:
Lucentio's father is arrived in Padua,
And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife.
Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.--
Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
Welcome! One mess is like to be your cheer.
Come, sir, we will better it in Pisa.
If this be not that you look for, I have no more to
But bid Bianca farewell forever and a day.
Luke's to bid the priest be ready to come against
She will be pleased. Then wherefore should I
Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her.
It shall go hard if "Cambio" go without her.
Come on, i' God's name, once more toward our
Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
The moon? The sun! It is not moonlight now.
Now, by my mother's son, and that's myself,
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
Or e'er I journey to your father's house.
Evermore crossed and crossed, nothing but crossed!
Say as he says, or we shall never go.
Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,
And be it moon, or sun, or what you please.
And if you please to call it a rush candle,
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
Nay, then you lie. It is the blessed sun.
Then God be blest, it is the blessed sun.
But sun it is not, when you say it is not,
And the moon changes even as your mind.
What you will have it named, even that it is,
And so it shall be so for Katherine.
Petruchio, go thy ways, the field is won.
Well, forward, forward. Thus the bowl should run,
And not unluckily against the bias.
But soft! Company is coming here.
Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly, too,
Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?
Such war of white and red within her cheeks!
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty
As those two eyes become that heavenly face?--
Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.--
Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.
He will make the man mad, to make the woman of
Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,
Whither away, or where is thy abode?
Happy the parents of so fair a child!
Happier the man whom favorable stars
Allots thee for his lovely bedfellow.
Why, how now, Kate? I hope thou art not mad!
This is a man--old, wrinkled, faded, withered--
And not a maiden, as thou sayst he is.
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes
That have been so bedazzled with the sun
That everything I look on seemeth green.
Now I perceive thou art a reverend father.
Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
Do, good old grandsire, and withal make known
Which way thou travelest. If along with us,
We shall be joyful of thy company.
Fair sir, and you, my merry mistress,
That with your strange encounter much amazed me,
My name is called Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa,
And bound I am to Padua, there to visit
What is his name?
Happily met, the happier for thy son.
And now by law as well as reverend age,
The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not,
Nor be not grieved. She is of good esteem,
Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth;
Beside, so qualified as may beseem
The spouse of any noble gentleman.
Let me embrace with old Vincentio,
And wander we to see thy honest son,
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.
But is this true, or is it else your pleasure,
Like pleasant travelers, to break a jest
Upon the company you overtake?
Come, go along and see the truth hereof,
For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart!
Have to my widow, and if she be froward,
Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.
Gremio is out before and stands to the side.]
Attendants.]
Sir, here's the door. This is Lucentio's house.
My father's bears more toward the marketplace.
Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
You shall not choose but drink before you go.
And by all likelihood some cheer is toward.
They're busy within. You were best knock louder.
Lucentio that his father is come from Pisa and is
Why, this is flat knavery, to take upon you another
Baptista!	
Tranio disguised as Lucentio.]
Bergamo.
Lay hold on him, I charge you in the Duke's name.
Carry this mad knave to the jail.--Father Baptista, I
Pardon, sweet father.	
Pardon, dear father.
Where is Lucentio?
Right son to the right Vincentio,
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine
While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.
Here's packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
Where is that damned villain, Tranio,
That faced and braved me in this matter so?
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.
Love wrought these miracles. Bianca's love
Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
While he did bear my countenance in the town,
And happily I have arrived at the last
Unto the wished haven of my bliss.
What Tranio did, myself enforced him to.
Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
My cake is dough, but I'll in among the rest,
Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.
Why, then, let's home again.  Come,
Nay, I will give thee a kiss.	
Now pray thee, love, stay.
Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate.
Better once than never, for never too late.
Lucentio, and Bianca; Hortensio and the Widow,
Petruchio and Katherine; Tranio, Biondello, and
Grumio, with Servingmen bringing in a banquet.]
At last, though long, our jarring notes agree,
And time it is when raging war is done
To smile at 'scapes and perils overblown.
My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,
While I with selfsame kindness welcome thine.
Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina,
And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house.
My banquet is to close our stomachs up
After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down,
For now we sit to chat as well as eat.	
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
For both our sakes I would that word were true.
Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow!
Then never trust me if I be afeard.
You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
Roundly replied.
Conceives by me? How likes Hortensio that?
My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.
Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.
Your husband being troubled with a shrew
Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe.
And now you know my meaning.
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.
Spoke like an officer! Ha' to thee, lad.
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.
Head and butt! An hasty-witted body
Would say your head and butt were head and horn.
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?
Ay, but not frighted me. Therefore I'll sleep again.
Nay, that you shall not. Since you have begun,
Have at you for a bitter jest or two.
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,
And then pursue me as you draw your bow.--
You are welcome all.	
She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio,
This bird you aimed at, though you hit her not.--
Therefore a health to all that shot and missed.
Which runs himself and catches for his master.
Confess, confess! Hath he not hit you here?
He has a little galled me, I confess.
And as the jest did glance away from me,
Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,
Well, I say no. And therefore, for assurance,
Let's each one send unto his wife,
And he whose wife is most obedient
To come at first when he doth send for her
Shall win the wager which we will propose.
Content, what's the wager?
But twenty times so much upon my wife.
Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
Son, I'll be your half Bianca comes.
How now, what news?
That she is busy, and she cannot come.
How? "She's busy, and she cannot come"?
Is that an answer?
Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife
To come to me forthwith.	
Nay, then, she must needs come.
Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.
Now, where's my wife?
She says you have some goodly jest in hand.
She will not come. She bids you come to her.
Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress,
Say I command her come to me.	
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
Now by my holidam, here comes Katherina!
What is your will, sir, that you send for me?
Where is your sister, and Hortensio's wife?
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.
Go fetch them hither. If they deny to come,
Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.
Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
And so it is. I wonder what it bodes.
Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,
An awful rule, and right supremacy,
And, to be short, what not that's sweet and happy.
Now fair befall thee, good Petruchio!
The wager thou hast won, and I will add
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns,
Another dowry to another daughter,
For she is changed as she had never been.
Nay, I will win my wager better yet,
And show more sign of her obedience,
Her new-built virtue and obedience.
See where she comes, and brings your froward
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.--
Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not.
Off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh
Till I be brought to such a silly pass.
Fie, what a foolish duty call you this?
The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,
Hath cost me a hundred crowns since suppertime.
The more fool you for laying on my duty.
Katherine, I charge thee tell these headstrong
What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
Come, come, you're mocking. We will have no
Come on, I say, and first begin with her.
Fie, fie! Unknit that threat'ning unkind brow,
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes
To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor.
It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,
Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,
And in no sense is meet or amiable.
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty,
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign, one that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance commits his body
To painful labor both by sea and land,
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe,
And craves no other tribute at thy hands
But love, fair looks, and true obedience--
Too little payment for so great a debt.
Such duty as the subject owes the prince,
Even such a woman oweth to her husband;
And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
And not obedient to his honest will,
What is she but a foul contending rebel
And graceless traitor to her loving lord?
To offer war where they should kneel for peace,
Or seek for rule, supremacy, and sway
When they are bound to serve, love, and obey.
Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth,
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,
But that our soft conditions and our hearts
Should well agree with our external parts?
Come, come, you froward and unable worms!
My mind hath been as big as one of yours,
My heart as great, my reason haply more,
To bandy word for word and frown for frown;
But now I see our lances are but straws,
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.
Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
And place your hands below your husband's foot;
In token of which duty, if he please,
My hand is ready, may it do him ease.
Why, there's a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.
Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha 't.
But a harsh hearing when women are froward.
We three are married, but you two are sped.
And being a winner, God give you good night.
Now, go thy ways, thou hast tamed a curst shrow.
Edward; Richard; Norfolk; Montague; Warwick; and
Soldiers, all wearing the white rose.]
While we pursued the horsemen of the north,
He slyly stole away and left his men;
Whereat the great lord of Northumberland,
Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
Cheered up the drooping army; and himself,
Lord Clifford, and Lord Stafford, all abreast,
Charged our main battle's front and, breaking in,
Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.
Lord Stafford's father, Duke of Buckingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerous.
That this is true, father, behold his blood.
And, brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshire's blood,
Whom I encountered as the battles joined.
Speak thou for me, and tell them what I did.
Richard hath best deserved of all my sons.
But is your Grace dead, my lord of Somerset?
Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!
Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.
And so do I, victorious prince of York.
Before I see thee seated in that throne
Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
This is the palace of the fearful king,
And this the regal seat. Possess it, York,
For this is thine and not King Henry's heirs'.
Assist me, then, sweet Warwick, and I will,
For hither we have broken in by force.
We'll all assist you. He that flies shall die.
Thanks, gentle Norfolk. Stay by me, my lords.--
And soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.
And when the King comes, offer him no violence
Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.
The Queen this day here holds her parliament,
But little thinks we shall be of her council.
By words or blows, here let us win our right.
Armed as we are, let's stay within this house.
Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be king
And bashful Henry deposed, whose cowardice
Hath made us bywords to our enemies.
Then leave me not, my lords; be resolute.
Neither the King nor he that loves him best,
The proudest he that holds up Lancaster,
Dares stir a wing if Warwick shake his bells.
Resolve thee, Richard; claim the English crown.
Westmorland, Exeter, and the rest, all wearing
My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair of state! Belike he means,
Backed by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father,
And thine, Lord Clifford, and you both have vowed
On him, his sons, his favorites, and his friends.
If I be not, heavens be revenged on me!
The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.
What, shall we suffer this? Let's pluck him down.
My heart for anger burns. I cannot brook it.
Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmorland.
Patience is for poltroons such as he.
He durst not sit there had your father lived.
My gracious lord, here in the Parliament
Let us assail the family of York.
Well hast thou spoken, cousin. Be it so.
Ah, know you not the city favors them,
And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?
But when the Duke is slain, they'll quickly fly.
Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
To make a shambles of the Parliament House!
Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words, and threats
Shall be the war that Henry means to use.--
Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne
And kneel for grace and mercy at my feet.
For shame, come down. He made thee Duke of
York.
It was my inheritance, as the earldom was.
Thy father was a traitor to the crown.
Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown
In following this usurping Henry.
Whom should he follow but his natural king?
True, Clifford, that's Richard, Duke of York.
And shall I stand, and thou sit in my throne?
It must and shall be so. Content thyself.
Be Duke of Lancaster. Let him be king.
He is both king and Duke of Lancaster,
And that the lord of Westmorland shall maintain.
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget
That we are those which chased you from the field
And slew your fathers and, with colors spread,
Marched through the city to the palace gates.
Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief;
And by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.
Plantagenet, of thee and these thy sons,
Thy kinsmen, and thy friends, I'll have more lives
Than drops of blood were in my father's veins.
Urge it no more, lest that, instead of words,
As shall revenge his death before I stir.
Poor Clifford, how I scorn his worthless threats!
Will you we show our title to the crown?
If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.
What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
Thy father was as thou art, Duke of York;
Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March.
Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop
And seized upon their towns and provinces.
Talk not of France, sith thou hast lost it all.
The Lord Protector lost it and not I.
When I was crowned, I was but nine months old.
You are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you
Father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.
Sweet father, do so. Set it on your head.
Good brother, as thou lov'st and honorest arms,
Let's fight it out and not stand caviling thus.
Sound drums and trumpets, and the King will fly.
Peace thou, and give King Henry leave to speak!
Plantagenet shall speak first. Hear him, lords,
And be you silent and attentive too,
For he that interrupts him shall not live.
Think'st thou that I will leave my kingly throne,
Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
No. First shall war unpeople this my realm;
Ay, and their colors, often borne in France,
And now in England to our heart's great sorrow,
Shall be my winding-sheet. Why faint you, lords?
My title's good, and better far than his.
Prove it, Henry, and thou shalt be king.
Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.
Tell me, may not a king adopt an heir?
An if he may, then am I lawful king;
For Richard, in the view of many lords,
Resigned the crown to Henry the Fourth,
Whose heir my father was, and I am his.
He rose against him, being his sovereign,
And made him to resign his crown perforce.
Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrained,
Think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown?
No, for he could not so resign his crown
But that the next heir should succeed and reign.
Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.
Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?
My conscience tells me he is lawful king.
All will revolt from me and turn to him.
Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st,
Think not that Henry shall be so deposed.
Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.
Thou art deceived. 'Tis not thy southern power
Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the Duke up in despite of me.
King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defense.
May that ground gape and swallow me alive
Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father.
Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.--
What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?
Do right unto this princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the house with armed men,
And over the chair of state, where now he sits,
Write up his title with usurping blood.
My lord of Warwick, hear but one word:
Let me for this my lifetime reign as king.
Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,
And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou liv'st.
Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.
What wrong is this unto the Prince your son!
What good is this to England and himself!
Base, fearful, and despairing Henry!
How hast thou injured both thyself and us!
Come, cousin, let us tell the Queen these news.
Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate king,
In whose cold blood no spark of honor bides.
Be thou a prey unto the house of York,
And die in bands for this unmanly deed.
In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandoned and despised!
Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.
They seek revenge and therefore will not yield.
Ah, Exeter!
Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son,
Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.
But be it as it may.  I here entail
The crown to thee and to thine heirs forever,
Conditionally, that here thou take an oath
To cease this civil war and, whilst I live,
To honor me as thy king and sovereign,
And neither by treason nor hostility
To seek to put me down and reign thyself.
This oath I willingly take and will perform.
Long live King Henry! Plantagenet, embrace him.
And long live thou and these thy forward sons!
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.
Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes.
Farewell, my gracious lord. I'll to my castle.
And I'll keep London with my soldiers.
And I to Norfolk with my followers.
And I unto the sea, from whence I came.
Montague, and their Soldiers exit.]
And I with grief and sorrow to the court.
Here comes the Queen, whose looks bewray her
Nay, go not from me. I will follow thee.
Be patient, gentle queen, and I will stay.
Who can be patient in such extremes?
Ah, wretched man, would I had died a maid
And never seen thee, never borne thee son,
Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father.
Hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus?
Hadst thou but loved him half so well as I,
Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
Or nourished him as I did with my blood,
Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood
Rather than have made that savage duke thine heir
And disinherited thine only son.
Father, you cannot disinherit me.
If you be king, why should not I succeed?
Pardon me, Margaret.--Pardon me, sweet son.
The Earl of Warwick and the Duke enforced me.
Enforced thee? Art thou king and wilt be forced?
Thou hast undone thyself, thy son, and me,
And giv'n unto the house of York such head
As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance!
To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
What is it but to make thy sepulcher
And creep into it far before thy time?
Warwick is Chancellor and the lord of Callice;
Stern Falconbridge commands the Narrow Seas;
The Duke is made Protector of the realm;
And yet shalt thou be safe? Such safety finds
The trembling lamb environed with wolves.
Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
The soldiers should have tossed me on their pikes
Before I would have granted to that act.
But thou preferr'st thy life before thine honor.
And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself
Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,
Until that act of Parliament be repealed
Whereby my son is disinherited.
The northern lords that have forsworn thy colors
Will follow mine if once they see them spread;
And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace
And utter ruin of the house of York.
Thus do I leave thee.--Come, son, let's away.
Our army is ready. Come, we'll after them.
Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.
Thou hast spoke too much already. Get thee gone.
Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?
Ay, to be murdered by his enemies!
When I return with victory from the field,
Come, son, away. We may not linger thus.
Poor queen! How love to me and to her son
Hath made her break out into terms of rage!
Revenged may she be on that hateful duke,
Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
Will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle
Tire on the flesh of me and of my son.
The loss of those three lords torments my heart.
Come, cousin, you shall be the messenger.
And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.
Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.
No, I can better play the orator.
But I have reasons strong and forcible.
Why, how now, sons and brother, at a strife?
What is your quarrel? How began it first?
No quarrel, but a slight contention.
About that which concerns your Grace and us:
The crown of England, father, which is yours.
Mine, boy? Not till King Henry be dead.
Your right depends not on his life or death.
Now you are heir; therefore enjoy it now.
By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
It will outrun you, father, in the end.
But for a kingdom any oath may be broken.
No, God forbid your Grace should be forsworn.
Thou canst not, son; it is impossible.
An oath is of no moment, being not took
Before a true and lawful magistrate
That hath authority over him that swears.
Henry had none, but did usurp the place.
Then, seeing 'twas he that made you to depose,
Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous.
Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think
How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown,
Within whose circuit is Elysium
And all that poets feign of bliss and joy.
Why do we linger thus? I cannot rest
Until the white rose that I wear be dyed
Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.
Richard, enough. I will be king or die.--
Brother, thou shalt to London presently,
And whet on Warwick to this enterprise.--
Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk
And tell him privily of our intent.--
You, Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise;
In them I trust, for they are soldiers
Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
While you are thus employed, what resteth more
But that I seek occasion how to rise,
And yet the King not privy to my drift,
Nor any of the house of Lancaster.
But stay, what news? Why com'st thou in such post?
The Queen with all the northern earls and lords
Intend here to besiege you in your castle.
She is hard by with twenty thousand men.
And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.	
Ay, with my sword. What, think'st thou that we fear
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me;
My brother Montague shall post to London.
Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
Whom we have left Protectors of the King,
With powerful policy strengthen themselves
And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.
Brother, I go. I'll win them, fear it not.
And thus most humbly I do take my leave.
Sir Hugh Mortimer.]
Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles,
You are come to Sandal in a happy hour.
The army of the Queen mean to besiege us.
She shall not need; we'll meet her in the field.
Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need.
And issue forth and bid them battle straight.
Five men to twenty: though the odds be great,
Many a battle have I won in France
Whenas the enemy hath been ten to one.
Why should I not now have the like success?
Ah, whither shall I fly to scape their hands?
Ah, tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes.
Chaplain, away. Thy priesthood saves thy life.
As for the brat of this accursed duke,
Whose father slew my father, he shall die.
And I, my lord, will bear him company.
Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child,
Lest thou be hated both of God and man.
How now? Is he dead already? Or is it fear
That makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.
So looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch
That trembles under his devouring paws;
And so he walks, insulting o'er his prey;
And so he comes to rend his limbs asunder.
Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword
And not with such a cruel threat'ning look.
Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die.
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.
In vain thou speak'st, poor boy. My father's blood
Hath stopped the passage where thy words should
Then let my father's blood open it again;
He is a man and, Clifford, cope with him.
Had I thy brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me.
No, if I digged up thy forefathers' graves
And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not slake mine ire nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of the house of York
Is as a fury to torment my soul,
And till I root out their accursed line
And leave not one alive, I live in hell.
Therefore--	
To thee I pray: sweet Clifford, pity me!
Such pity as my rapier's point affords.
Thy father hath.
Thou hast one son; for his sake pity me,
Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
He be as miserably slain as I.
Ah, let me live in prison all my days,
And when I give occasion of offense
Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.
No cause? Thy father slew my father; therefore die.
Di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!	
Plantagenet, I come, Plantagenet!
And this thy son's blood, cleaving to my blade,
Shall rust upon my weapon till thy blood,
Congealed with this, do make me wipe off both.
The army of the Queen hath got the field.
My uncles both are slain in rescuing me;
And all my followers to the eager foe
Turn back and fly like ships before the wind,
Or lambs pursued by hunger-starved wolves.
My sons, God knows what hath bechanced them;
But this I know: they have demeaned themselves
Like men borne to renown by life or death.
Three times did Richard make a lane to me
And thrice cried "Courage, father, fight it out!"
And full as oft came Edward to my side,
With purple falchion painted to the hilt
In blood of those that had encountered him;
And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
Richard cried "Charge, and give no foot of ground!"
And cried "A crown or else a glorious tomb;
With this we charged again; but, out alas,
We budged again, as I have seen a swan
With bootless labor swim against the tide
And spend her strength with over-matching waves.
Ah, hark, the fatal followers do pursue,
And I am faint and cannot fly their fury;
And were I strong, I would not shun their fury.
The sands are numbered that makes up my life.
Here must I stay, and here my life must end.
Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.
Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm
With downright payment showed unto my father.
Now Phaeton hath tumbled from his car
And made an evening at the noontide prick.
My ashes, as the Phoenix', may bring forth
And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven,
Scorning whate'er you can afflict me with.
Why come you not? What, multitudes, and fear?
So cowards fight when they can fly no further;
So doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons;
So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
Breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.
And in thy thought o'errun my former time;
And, if thou canst for blushing, view this face
And bite thy tongue that slanders him with cowardice
Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this.
But buckler with thee blows twice two for one.
Hold, valiant Clifford, for a thousand causes
Wrath makes him deaf; speak thou, Northumberland.
Hold, Clifford, do not honor him so much
To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart.
What valor were it when a cur doth grin
For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
When he might spurn him with his foot away?
It is war's prize to take all vantages,
And ten to one is no impeach of valor.
Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.
So doth the coney struggle in the net.
So triumph thieves upon their conquered booty;
So true men yield with robbers, so o'ermatched.
What would your Grace have done unto him now?
Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
Come, make him stand upon this molehill here
That raught at mountains with outstretched arms,
Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
What, was it you that would be England's king?
Was 't you that reveled in our parliament
And made a preachment of your high descent?
Where are your mess of sons to back you now,
The wanton Edward and the lusty George?
And where's that valiant crookback prodigy,
Dickie, your boy, that with his grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?
Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
Look, York, I stained this napkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford with his rapier's point
Made issue from the bosom of the boy;
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
Alas, poor York, but that I hate thee deadly
What, hath thy fiery heart so parched thine entrails
That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death?
Why art thou patient, man? Thou shouldst be mad;
And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
Thou would'st be fee'd, I see, to make me sport.--
York cannot speak unless he wear a crown.
And, lords, bow low to him.
Hold you his hands whilst I do set it on.
Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king.
Ay, this is he that took King Henry's chair,
And this is he was his adopted heir.
But how is it that great Plantagenet
Is crowned so soon and broke his solemn oath?--
As I bethink me, you should not be king
Till our King Henry had shook hands with Death.
And will you pale your head in Henry's glory
And rob his temples of the diadem
Now, in his life, against your holy oath?
Off with the crown and, with the crown, his head;
And whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.
That is my office, for my father's sake.
Nay, stay, let's hear the orisons he makes.
She-wolf of France, but worse than wolves of
France,
Whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth:
How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex
To triumph like an Amazonian trull
Upon their woes whom Fortune captivates.
But that thy face is vizard-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with use of evil deeds,
To tell thee whence thou cam'st, of whom derived,
Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not
Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils, and Jerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen,
Unless the adage must be verified
That beggars mounted run their horse to death.
But God He knows thy share thereof is small.
The contrary doth make thee wondered at.
The want thereof makes thee abominable.
Thou art as opposite to every good
As the Antipodes are unto us
Or as the south to the Septentrion.
How couldst thou drain the lifeblood of the child
To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a woman's face?
Women are soft, mild, pitiful, and flexible;
Thou, stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
Bidd'st thou me rage? Why, now thou hast thy wish.
Wouldst have me weep? Why, now thou hast thy will;
For raging wind blows up incessant showers,
And when the rage allays, the rain begins.
These tears are my sweet Rutland's obsequies,
And every drop cries vengeance for his death
Frenchwoman!
Beshrew me, but his passions moves me so
That hardly can I check my eyes from tears.
That face of his the hungry cannibals
Would not have touched, would not have stained
But you are more inhuman, more inexorable,
See, ruthless queen, a hapless father's tears.
This cloth thou dipped'st in blood of my sweet boy,
And I with tears do wash the blood away.
Keep thou the napkin and go boast of this;
And if thou tell'st the heavy story right,
Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears.
Yea, even my foes will shed fast-falling tears
And say "Alas, it was a piteous deed."
There, take the crown and, with the crown, my
And in thy need such comfort come to thee
As now I reap at thy too cruel hand.--
Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world,
My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads.
Had he been slaughterman to all my kin,
To see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.
What, weeping ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.
Here's for my oath; here's for my father's death!
And here's to right our gentle-hearted king.
Open thy gate of mercy, gracious God.
My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.
Off with his head, and set it on York gates,
So York may overlook the town of York.
Or whether he be scaped away or no
From Clifford's and Northumberland's pursuit.
Had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news;
Had he been slain, we should have heard the news;
Or had he scaped, methinks we should have heard
The happy tidings of his good escape.
How fares my brother? Why is he so sad?
Where our right valiant father is become.
And watched him how he singled Clifford forth.
Methought he bore him in the thickest troop
As doth a lion in a herd of neat,
Or as a bear encompassed round with dogs,
Who having pinched a few and made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof and bark at him;
So fared our father with his enemies;
So fled his enemies my warlike father.
Methinks 'tis prize enough to be his son.
See how the morning opes her golden gates
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun.
How well resembles it the prime of youth,
Trimmed like a younker, prancing to his love!
Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?
Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun,
Not separated with the racking clouds
But severed in a pale clear-shining sky.
See, see, they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vowed some league inviolable.
Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun;
In this, the heaven figures some event.
That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
Each one already blazing by our meeds,
Should notwithstanding join our lights together
And overshine the earth, as this the world.
Whate'er it bodes, henceforward will I bear
Upon my target three fair shining suns.
Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it,
You love the breeder better than the male.
But what art thou whose heavy looks foretell
Some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?
Ah, one that was a woeful looker-on
Whenas the noble Duke of York was slain,
Your princely father and my loving lord.
Say how he died, for I will hear it all.
Environed he was with many foes,
And stood against them, as the hope of Troy
Against the Greeks that would have entered Troy.
But Hercules himself must yield to odds;
And many strokes, though with a little axe,
Hews down and fells the hardest-timbered oak.
By many hands your father was subdued,
But only slaughtered by the ireful arm
Of unrelenting Clifford and the Queen,
Who crowned the gracious duke in high despite,
Laughed in his face; and when with grief he wept,
The ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain.
And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
They took his head and on the gates of York
They set the same, and there it doth remain,
The saddest spectacle that e'er I viewed.	
Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.
The flower of Europe for his chivalry;
And treacherously hast thou vanquished him,
For hand to hand he would have vanquished thee.
Now my soul's palace is become a prison;
Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
Might in the ground be closed up in rest,
For never henceforth shall I joy again.
Never, O never, shall I see more joy!	
Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart;
Nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burden,
For selfsame wind that I should speak withal
Is kindling coals that fires all my breast
And burns me up with flames that tears would
To weep is to make less the depth of grief:
Tears, then, for babes; blows and revenge for me.
Richard, I bear thy name. I'll venge thy death
Or die renowned by attempting it.
His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;
His dukedom and his chair with me is left.
Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird,
Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun;
For "chair" and "dukedom," "throne" and
Either that is thine or else thou wert not his.
How now, fair lords? What fare, what news abroad?
Great lord of Warwick, if we should recount
Our baleful news, and at each word's deliverance
Stab poniards in our flesh till all were told,
The words would add more anguish than the wounds.
Which held thee dearly as his soul's redemption
Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.
Ten days ago I drowned these news in tears.
And now to add more measure to your woes,
After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run,
Were brought me of your loss and his depart.
Mustered my soldiers, gathered flocks of friends,
Marched toward Saint Albans to intercept the
Queen,
Bearing the King in my behalf along;
For by my scouts I was advertised
That she was coming with a full intent
To dash our late decree in Parliament
Touching King Henry's oath and your succession.
Short tale to make, we at Saint Albans met,
Our battles joined, and both sides fiercely fought.
But whether 'twas the coldness of the King,
Who looked full gently on his warlike queen,
That robbed my soldiers of their heated spleen,
Or whether 'twas report of her success
Or more than common fear of Clifford's rigor,
Who thunders to his captives blood and death,
Their weapons like to lightning came and went;
Our soldiers', like the night owl's lazy flight
Or like an idle thresher with a flail,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
With promise of high pay and great rewards,
But all in vain; they had no heart to fight,
And we, in them, no hope to win the day,
So that we fled: the King unto the Queen;
Lord George your brother, Norfolk, and myself
In haste, posthaste, are come to join with you;
For in the Marches here we heard you were,
Making another head to fight again.
Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?
Some six miles off the Duke is with the soldiers,
And, for your brother, he was lately sent
From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
With aid of soldiers to this needful war.
Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,
But ne'er till now his scandal of retire.
Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear?
For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine
Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry's head
And wring the awful scepter from his fist,
Were he as famous and as bold in war
As he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.
But in this troublous time, what's to be done?
Shall we go throw away our coats of steel
And wrap our bodies in black mourning gowns,
Numb'ring our Ave Marys with our beads?
Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
If for the last, say "Ay," and to it, lords.
Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out,
And therefore comes my brother Montague.
Attend me, lords: the proud insulting queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland
And of their feather many more proud birds,
Have wrought the easy-melting king like wax.
He swore consent to your succession,
His oath enrolled in the Parliament.
And now to London all the crew are gone
To frustrate both his oath and what beside
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong.
Now, if the help of Norfolk and myself,
With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,
Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
Why, via, to London will we march,
And once again bestride our foaming steeds,
And once again cry "Charge!" upon our foes,
But never once again turn back and fly.
Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak.
Ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day
That cries "Retire!" if Warwick bid him stay.
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean,
And when thou fail'st--as God forbid the hour!--
Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend.
No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York;
The next degree is England's royal throne:
For King of England shalt thou be proclaimed
In every borough as we pass along,
And he that throws not up his cap for joy
Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
Stay we no longer dreaming of renown,
But sound the trumpets and about our task.
Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,
As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
Then strike up drums! God and Saint George for us!
The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,
The Queen is coming with a puissant host,
And craves your company for speedy counsel.
Why, then it sorts. Brave warriors, let's away!
Clifford, Northumberland, and young Prince Edward,
Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.
Yonder's the head of that arch-enemy
That sought to be encompassed with your crown.
Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?
Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wrack!
To see this sight, it irks my very soul.
Withhold revenge, dear God! 'Tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.
My gracious liege, this too much lenity
And harmful pity must be laid aside.
To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
Not to the beast that would usurp their den.
Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
Not his that spoils her young before her face.
Who scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest worm will turn, being trodden on,
And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
Ambitious York did level at thy crown,
Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows.
He, but a duke, would have his son a king
And raise his issue like a loving sire;
Thou being a king, blest with a goodly son,
Didst yield consent to disinherit him,
Which argued thee a most unloving father.
Unreasonable creatures feed their young;
And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet in protection of their tender ones,
Who hath not seen them, even with those wings
Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,
Make war with him that climbed unto their nest,
Offering their own lives in their young's defense?
For shame, my liege, make them your precedent.
Were it not pity that this goodly boy
Should lose his birthright by his father's fault,
And long hereafter say unto his child
My careless father fondly gave away"?
Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy,
And let his manly face, which promiseth
Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart
To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.
Full well hath Clifford played the orator,
Inferring arguments of mighty force.
But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear
That things ill got had ever bad success?
And happy always was it for that son
Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
And would my father had left me no more;
For all the rest is held at such a rate
As brings a thousandfold more care to keep
Than in possession any jot of pleasure.
Ah, cousin York, would thy best friends did know
How it doth grieve me that thy head is here.
My lord, cheer up your spirits; our foes are nigh,
And this soft courage makes your followers faint.
You promised knighthood to our forward son.
Unsheathe your sword and dub him presently.--
Edward, kneel down.	
Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight,
And learn this lesson: draw thy sword in right.
My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
And in that quarrel use it to the death.
Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.
Royal commanders, be in readiness,
For with a band of thirty thousand men
Comes Warwick backing of the Duke of York,
And in the towns as they do march along
Proclaims him king, and many fly to him.
Deraign your battle, for they are at hand.	
The Queen hath best success when you are absent.
Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.
Why, that's my fortune too; therefore I'll stay.
Be it with resolution, then, to fight.
My royal father, cheer these noble lords
And hearten those that fight in your defense.
Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry "Saint
George!"
George, Norfolk, Montague, and Soldiers,
Now, perjured Henry, wilt thou kneel for grace
And set thy diadem upon my head,
Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?
Go rate thy minions, proud insulting boy.
Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms
Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?
Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,
You that are king, though he do wear the crown,
Have caused him, by new act of Parliament,
To blot out me and put his own son in.
Who should succeed the father but the son?
Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!
Ay, crookback, here I stand to answer thee,
Or any he, the proudest of thy sort.
Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.
For God's sake, lords, give signal to the fight!
What sayst thou, Henry? Wilt thou yield the crown?
Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick, dare you
When you and I met at Saint Albans last,
Your legs did better service than your hands.
Then 'twas my turn to fly, and now 'tis thine.
You said so much before, and yet you fled.
No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.
Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.--
Break off the parley, for scarce I can refrain
The execution of my big-swoll'n heart
Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.
Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,
As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland.
But ere sunset I'll make thee curse the deed.
Have done with words, my lords, and hear me
Defy them, then, or else hold close thy lips.
My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
Cannot be cured by words; therefore, be still.
Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword.
By Him that made us all, I am resolved
That Clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue.
Say, Henry, shall I have my right or no?
That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.
If thou deny, their blood upon thy head,
For York in justice puts his armor on.
If that be right which Warwick says is right,
There is no wrong, but everything is right.
Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands,
For well I wot thou hast thy mother's tongue.
But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam,
But like a foul misshapen stigmatic,
Marked by the Destinies to be avoided,
As venom toads or lizards' dreadful stings.
Iron of Naples, hid with English gilt,
Whose father bears the title of a king,
As if a channel should be called the sea,
Sham'st thou not, knowing whence thou art
To let thy tongue detect thy baseborn heart?
To make this shameless callet know herself.--
Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,
Although thy husband may be Menelaus;
And ne'er was Agamemnon's brother wronged
By that false woman as this king by thee.
His father reveled in the heart of France,
And tamed the King, and made the Dauphin stoop;
And had he matched according to his state,
He might have kept that glory to this day.
But when he took a beggar to his bed
And graced thy poor sire with his bridal day,
Even then that sunshine brewed a shower for him
That washed his father's fortunes forth of France
And heaped sedition on his crown at home.
For what hath broached this tumult but thy pride?
Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept,
And we, in pity of the gentle king,
Had slipped our claim until another age.
But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring,
And that thy summer bred us no increase,
We set the axe to thy usurping root;
And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,
Yet know thou, since we have begun to strike,
We'll never leave till we have hewn thee down
Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.
And in this resolution, I defy thee,
Not willing any longer conference,
Since thou denied'st the gentle king to speak.--
Sound, trumpets! Let our bloody colors wave;
And either victory or else a grave!
No, wrangling woman, we'll no longer stay.
These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
Forspent with toil, as runners with a race,
For strokes received and many blows repaid
Have robbed my strong-knit sinews of their strength;
And spite of spite, needs must I rest awhile.
Smile, gentle heaven, or strike, ungentle death,
For this world frowns and Edward's sun is clouded.
How now, my lord, what hap? What hope of good?
Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair;
Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us.
What counsel give you? Whither shall we fly?
Bootless is flight; they follow us with wings,
And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.
Ah, Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?
Thy brother's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
Broached with the steely point of Clifford's lance,
And in the very pangs of death he cried,
Like to a dismal clangor heard from far,
So, underneath the belly of their steeds,
That stained their fetlocks in his smoking blood,
The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.
Then let the earth be drunken with our blood!
Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
Wailing our losses whiles the foe doth rage,
And look upon, as if the tragedy
Were played in jest by counterfeiting actors?
Here on my knee I vow to God above
Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine
Or Fortune given me measure of revenge.
And in this vow do chain my soul to thine
And, ere my knee rise from the Earth's cold face,
Thou setter up and plucker down of kings,
Beseeching Thee, if with Thy will it stands
That to my foes this body must be prey,
Yet that Thy brazen gates of heaven may ope
And give sweet passage to my sinful soul.
Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,
Where'er it be, in heaven or in Earth.
Brother, give me thy hand.--And, gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in my weary arms.
That winter should cut off our springtime so.
Away, away! Once more, sweet lords, farewell.
Yet let us all together to our troops
And give them leave to fly that will not stay,
And call them pillars that will stand to us;
And, if we thrive, promise them such rewards
As victors wear at the Olympian Games.
This may plant courage in their quailing breasts,
For yet is hope of life and victory.
Forslow no longer; make we hence amain.
Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone.
Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
And this for Rutland, both bound to revenge,
Wert thou environed with a brazen wall.
Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone.
This is the hand that stabbed thy father York,
And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland,
And here's the heart that triumphs in their death
And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother
To execute the like upon thyself.
And so, have at thee!
Nay, Warwick, single out some other chase,
For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.
This battle fares like to the morning's war,
When dying clouds contend with growing light,
What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
Can neither call it perfect day nor night.
Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea
Forced by the tide to combat with the wind;
Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea
Forced to retire by fury of the wind.
Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind;
Now one the better, then another best,
Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast,
Yet neither conqueror nor conquered.
So is the equal poise of this fell war.
Here on this molehill will I sit me down.
To whom God will, there be the victory;
For Margaret my queen and Clifford too
Have chid me from the battle, swearing both
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Would I were dead, if God's good will were so,
For what is in this world but grief and woe?
To be no better than a homely swain,
To sit upon a hill as I do now,
To carve out dials quaintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the minutes how they run:
How many makes the hour full complete,
How many hours brings about the day,
How many days will finish up the year,
How many years a mortal man may live.
When this is known, then to divide the times:
So many hours must I tend my flock,
So many hours must I take my rest,
So many hours must I contemplate,
So many hours must I sport myself,
So many days my ewes have been with young,
So many weeks ere the poor fools will ean,
So many years ere I shall shear the fleece;
So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,
Passed over to the end they were created,
Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
Ah, what a life were this! How sweet, how lovely!
Gives not the hawthorn bush a sweeter shade
To shepherds looking on their silly sheep
Than doth a rich embroidered canopy
To kings that fear their subjects' treachery?
And to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle,
His wonted sleep under a fresh tree's shade,
All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a prince's delicates--
His viands sparkling in a golden cup,
His body couched in a curious bed--
When care, mistrust, and treason waits on him.
Father, carrying the body.]
Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.
This man, whom hand to hand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with some store of crowns,
And I, that haply take them from him now,
May yet ere night yield both my life and them
To some man else, as this dead man doth me.
Who's this? O God! It is my father's face,
Whom in this conflict I unwares have killed.
From London by the King was I pressed forth.
My father, being the Earl of Warwick's man,
Came on the part of York, pressed by his master.
And I, who at his hands received my life,
Have by my hands of life bereaved him.
Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did;
And pardon, father, for I knew not thee.
My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks,
And no more words till they have flowed their fill.
Whiles lions war and battle for their dens,
Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
Weep, wretched man. I'll aid thee tear for tear,
And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war,
Be blind with tears and break, o'ercharged with grief.
Thou that so stoutly hath resisted me,
Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold,
For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
But let me see: is this our foeman's face?
Ah, no, no, no, it is mine only son!
Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,
Throw up thine eye! See, see, what showers arise,
Blown with the windy tempest of my heart
Upon thy wounds, that kills mine eye and heart!
What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly,
Erroneous, mutinous, and unnatural
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget!
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!
Woe above woe, grief more than common grief!
The red rose and the white are on his face,
The fatal colors of our striving houses;
The one his purple blood right well resembles,
The other his pale cheeks methinks presenteth.
Wither one rose and let the other flourish;
If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.
How will my mother for a father's death
Take on with me and ne'er be satisfied!
How will my wife for slaughter of my son
Shed seas of tears and ne'er be satisfied!
How will the country for these woeful chances
Misthink the King and not be satisfied!
Was ever son so rued a father's death?
Was ever father so bemoaned his son?
Was ever king so grieved for subjects' woe?
Much is your sorrow, mine ten times so much.
These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet;
My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulcher,
For from my heart thine image ne'er shall go.
My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell;
And so obsequious will thy father be
As Priam was for all his valiant sons.
For I have murdered where I should not kill.
Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,
Here sits a king more woeful than you are.
Edward, and Exeter, all wearing the red rose.]
Fly, father, fly, for all your friends are fled,
And Warwick rages like a chafed bull.
Away, for Death doth hold us in pursuit.
Mount you, my lord; towards Berwick post amain.
Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds
Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath
And bloody steel grasped in their ireful hands,
Are at our backs, and therefore hence amain.
Away, for Vengeance comes along with them.
Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed;
Or else come after; I'll away before.
Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter;
Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
Whither the Queen intends. Forward, away!
Here burns my candle out; ay, here it dies,
Which whiles it lasted gave King Henry light.
More than my body's parting with my soul!
My love and fear glued many friends to thee;
And now I fall, thy tough commixtures melts,
Impairing Henry, strength'ning misproud York;
And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
And who shines now but Henry's enemies?
That Phaeton should check thy fiery steeds,
Thy burning car never had scorched the Earth!
And Henry, hadst thou swayed as kings should do,
Or as thy father and his father did,
Giving no ground unto the house of York,
They never then had sprung like summer flies;
Had left no mourning widows for our death,
And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.
For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds;
No way to fly, no strength to hold out flight.
The foe is merciless and will not pity,
For at their hands I have deserved no pity.
The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.
Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest.
Richard, and Soldiers, Montague, and George,
Now breathe we, lords. Good fortune bids us pause
And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen
That led calm Henry, though he were a king,
As doth a sail filled with a fretting gust
Command an argosy to stem the waves.
But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?
No, 'tis impossible he should escape,
For, though before his face I speak the words,
Your brother Richard marked him for the grave,
And wheresoe'er he is, he's surely dead.
Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?
See who it is; and, now the battle's ended,
If friend or foe, let him be gently used.
Revoke that doom of mercy, for 'tis Clifford,
Who not contented that he lopped the branch
In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,
But set his murd'ring knife unto the root
From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring,
From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
Your father's head, which Clifford placed there;
Instead whereof let this supply the room.
Measure for measure must be answered.
Bring forth that fatal screech owl to our house
That nothing sung but death to us and ours;
Now death shall stop his dismal threat'ning sound,
And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.
Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to
Dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.
Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
Which in the time of death he gave our father.
If so thou think'st, vex him with eager words.
Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.
Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.
While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.
Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.
Thou pitied'st Rutland; I will pity thee.
Where's Captain Margaret to fence you now?
They mock thee, Clifford; swear as thou wast wont.
What, not an oath? Nay, then, the world goes hard
When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.
If this right hand would buy but two hours' life
That I in all despite might rail at him,
This hand should chop it off, and with the issuing
Stifle the villain whose unstaunched thirst
York and young Rutland could not satisfy.
Ay, but he's dead. Off with the traitor's head,
And rear it in the place your father's stands.
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned England's royal king,
From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France
And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen;
So shalt thou sinew both these lands together,
And having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread
The scattered foe that hopes to rise again;
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
First will I see the coronation,
And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea
To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.
Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be;
For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,
And never will I undertake the thing
Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.--
Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester,
And George, of Clarence. Warwick as ourself
Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.
Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester,
For Gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.
Tut, that's a foolish observation.
Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London,
To see these honors in possession.
Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves,
For through this laund anon the deer will come;
And in this covert will we make our stand,
Culling the principal of all the deer.
That cannot be. The noise of thy crossbow
Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
Here stand we both, and aim we at the best.
And for the time shall not seem tedious,
In this self place where now we mean to stand.
Here comes a man; let's stay till he be past.
From Scotland am I stol'n, even of pure love,
To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.
No, Harry, Harry, 'tis no land of thine!
Thy place is filled, thy scepter wrung from thee,
Thy balm washed off wherewith thou wast anointed.
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble suitors press to speak for right,
No, not a man comes for redress of thee;
For how can I help them an not myself?
Ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee.
This is the quondam king. Let's seize upon him.
Let me embrace the sour adversaries,
For wise men say it is the wisest course.
Why linger we? Let us lay hands upon him.
Forbear awhile; we'll hear a little more.
My queen and son are gone to France for aid,
And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
Is thither gone to crave the French king's sister
To wife for Edward. If this news be true,
Poor queen and son, your labor is but lost,
For Warwick is a subtle orator,
And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words.
By this account, then, Margaret may win him,
For she's a woman to be pitied much.
Her sighs will make a batt'ry in his breast,
Her tears will pierce into a marble heart.
The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn,
And Nero will be tainted with remorse
To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.
Ay, but she's come to beg, Warwick to give;
She on his left side craving aid for Henry;
He on his right asking a wife for Edward.
She weeps and says her Henry is deposed;
He smiles and says his Edward is installed;
That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more,
Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,
Inferreth arguments of mighty strength,
And in conclusion wins the King from her
With promise of his sister and what else
To strengthen and support King Edward's place.
Art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn.
Say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?
More than I seem, and less than I was born to:
And men may talk of kings, and why not I?
Ay, but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king.
Why, so I am in mind, and that's enough.
But if thou be a king, where is thy crown?
My crown is in my heart, not on my head;
Not decked with diamonds and Indian stones,
Nor to be seen. My crown is called content;
Well, if you be a king crowned with content,
Your crown content and you must be contented
To go along with us. For, as we think,
You are the king King Edward hath deposed;
And we his subjects sworn in all allegiance
Will apprehend you as his enemy.
But did you never swear and break an oath?
No, never such an oath, nor will not now.
Where did you dwell when I was King of England?
Here in this country, where we now remain.
My father and my grandfather were kings,
And you were sworn true subjects unto me.
And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?
No, for we were subjects but while you were king.
Why, am I dead? Do I not breathe a man?
Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear.
Look as I blow this feather from my face
And as the air blows it to me again,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow
And yielding to another when it blows,
Commanded always by the greater gust,
Such is the lightness of you common men.
But do not break your oaths, for of that sin
My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
Go where you will, the King shall be commanded,
And be you kings: command, and I'll obey.
We are true subjects to the King, King Edward.
So would you be again to Henry
If he were seated as King Edward is.
We charge you in God's name and the King's
To go with us unto the officers.
In God's name, lead. Your king's name be obeyed,
And what God will, that let your king perform.
And what he will, I humbly yield unto.
George, Duke of Clarence, Lady Grey,
Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Albans field
This lady's husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,
His land then seized on by the conqueror.
Her suit is now to repossess those lands,
Which we in justice cannot well deny,
Because in quarrel of the house of York
The worthy gentleman did lose his life.
Your Highness shall do well to grant her suit;
It were dishonor to deny it her.
It were no less, but yet I'll make a pause.
Before the King will grant her humble suit.
He knows the game; how true he keeps the wind!
Widow, we will consider of your suit,
And come some other time to know our mind.
Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay.
May it please your Highness to resolve me now,
And what your pleasure is shall satisfy me.
Ay, widow? Then I'll warrant you all your lands,
An if what pleases him shall pleasure you.
Fight closer, or, good faith, you'll catch a blow.
God forbid that, for he'll take vantages.
How many children hast thou, widow? Tell me.
Nay, then, whip me; he'll rather give her two.
You shall have four if you'll be ruled by him.
Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.
Lords, give us leave. I'll try this widow's wit.
Ay, good leave have you, for you will have leave
Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch.
Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?
Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.
And would you not do much to do them good?
To do them good I would sustain some harm.
Then get your husband's lands to do them good.
Therefore I came unto your Majesty.
So shall you bind me to your Highness' service.
What service wilt thou do me if I give them?
What you command that rests in me to do.
But you will take exceptions to my boon.
No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.
Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.
Why, then, I will do what your Grace commands.
He plies her hard, and much rain wears the marble.
As red as fire! Nay, then, her wax must melt.
Why stops my lord? Shall I not hear my task?
An easy task; 'tis but to love a king.
That's soon performed because I am a subject.
Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.
The match is made; she seals it with a cursy.
But stay thee; 'tis the fruits of love I mean.
The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.
Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.
What love, think'st thou, I sue so much to get?
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers,
That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.
No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.
Why, then, you mean not as I thought you did.
But now you partly may perceive my mind.
My mind will never grant what I perceive
Your Highness aims at, if I aim aright.
To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.
To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.
Why, then, thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.
Why, then, mine honesty shall be my dower,
For by that loss I will not purchase them.
Therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.
Herein your Highness wrongs both them and me.
But, mighty lord, this merry inclination
Accords not with the sadness of my suit.
Please you dismiss me either with ay or no.
Ay, if thou wilt say "ay" to my request;
No, if thou dost say "no" to my demand.
Then no, my lord; my suit is at an end.
The widow likes him not; she knits her brows.
He is the bluntest wooer in Christendom.
Her looks doth argue her replete with modesty;
Her words doth show her wit incomparable;
All her perfections challenge sovereignty.
One way or other, she is for a king,
And she shall be my love or else my queen.--
Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?
But far unfit to be a sovereign.
Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee
And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.
And that is more than I will yield unto.
And yet too good to be your concubine.
You cavil, widow; I did mean my queen.
No more than when my daughters call thee mother.
Thou art a widow and thou hast some children,
And, by God's mother, I, being but a bachelor,
Have other some. Why, 'tis a happy thing
To be the father unto many sons.
Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.
The ghostly father now hath done his shrift.
When he was made a shriver, 'twas for shift.
Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.
The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.
You'd think it strange if I should marry her.
To who, my lord?
That would be ten days' wonder at the least.
That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.
By so much is the wonder in extremes.
Well, jest on, brothers. I can tell you both
Her suit is granted for her husband's lands.
My gracious lord, Henry, your foe, is taken
And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.
See that he be conveyed unto the Tower.
And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,
To question of his apprehension.--
Widow, go you along.--Lords, use her honorably.
Richard remains.]
Ay, Edward will use women honorably!
Would he were wasted--marrow, bones, and all--
That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring
To cross me from the golden time I look for.
And yet, between my soul's desire and me,
The lustful Edward's title buried,
Is Clarence, Henry, and his son, young Edward,
And all the unlooked-for issue of their bodies
To take their rooms ere I can place myself.
Why, then, I do but dream on sovereignty
Like one that stands upon a promontory
And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
Saying he'll lade it dry to have his way.
So do I wish the crown, being so far off,
And so I chide the means that keeps me from it,
And so, I say, I'll cut the causes off,
Flattering me with impossibilities.
My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much,
Unless my hand and strength could equal them.
Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard,
What other pleasure can the world afford?
And deck my body in gay ornaments,
And 'witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.
Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns!
Why, Love forswore me in my mother's womb,
And, for I should not deal in her soft laws,
She did corrupt frail Nature with some bribe
To shrink mine arm up like a withered shrub;
To make an envious mountain on my back,
Where sits Deformity to mock my body;
To shape my legs of an unequal size;
To disproportion me in every part,
Like to a chaos, or an unlicked bear-whelp,
That carries no impression like the dam.
And am I then a man to be beloved?
Then, since this Earth affords no joy to me
But to command, to check, to o'erbear such
As are of better person than myself,
And, whiles I live, t' account this world but hell
Until my misshaped trunk that bears this head
Be round impaled with a glorious crown.
And yet I know not how to get the crown,
For many lives stand between me and home;
And I, like one lost in a thorny wood,
That rents the thorns and is rent with the thorns,
Seeking a way and straying from the way,
Not knowing how to find the open air,
But toiling desperately to find it out,
Torment myself to catch the English crown.
And from that torment I will free myself
Or hew my way out with a bloody axe.
Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
And cry "Content" to that which grieves my heart,
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,
And frame my face to all occasions.
Deceive more slyly than Ulysses could,
And, like a Sinon, take another Troy.
Change shapes with Proteus for advantages,
And set the murderous Machiavel to school.
Can I do this and cannot get a crown?
Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.
Prince Edward, Queen Margaret, and the Earl of Oxford,
Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
Sit down with us. It ill befits thy state
And birth that thou shouldst stand while Lewis
No, mighty King of France. Now Margaret
Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve
Where kings command. I was, I must confess,
Great Albion's queen in former golden days,
But now mischance hath trod my title down
And with dishonor laid me on the ground,
Where I must take like seat unto my fortune
And to my humble seat conform myself.
Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep
From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears
And stops my tongue, while heart is drowned in cares.
Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself,
And sit thee by our side.	
Yield not thy neck
To Fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind
Still ride in triumph over all mischance.
Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief.
It shall be eased if France can yield relief.
Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts
And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.
Now therefore be it known to noble Lewis
That Henry, sole possessor of my love,
Is, of a king, become a banished man
And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn;
While proud ambitious Edward, Duke of York,
Usurps the regal title and the seat
Of England's true-anointed lawful king.
This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir,
Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid;
And if thou fail us, all our hope is done.
Scotland hath will to help but cannot help;
Our people and our peers are both misled,
Our treasure seized, our soldiers put to flight,
And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.
Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm
While we bethink a means to break it off.
The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.
The more I stay, the more I'll succor thee.
And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow.
What's he approacheth boldly to our presence?
Our Earl of Warwick, Edward's greatest friend.
Welcome, brave Warwick. What brings thee to France?
Ay, now begins a second storm to rise,
For this is he that moves both wind and tide.
From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
My lord and sovereign and thy vowed friend,
First, to do greetings to thy royal person,
And then to crave a league of amity,
And, lastly, to confirm that amity
With nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,
To England's king in lawful marriage.
If that go forward, Henry's hope is done.
And, gracious madam, in our king's behalf,
Humbly to kiss your hand, and with my tongue
To tell the passion of my sovereign's heart,
Where fame, late ent'ring at his heedful ears,
Hath placed thy beauty's image and thy virtue.
King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak
Before you answer Warwick. His demand
Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love,
But from deceit, bred by necessity;
For how can tyrants safely govern home
Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
To prove him tyrant, this reason may suffice:
That Henry liveth still; but were he dead,
Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son.
Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and
Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonor;
For though usurpers sway the rule awhile,
Yet heav'ns are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.
Injurious Margaret!
Because thy father Henry did usurp,
And thou no more art prince than she is queen.
Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt,
Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
And after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest;
And after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
Who by his prowess conquered all France.
From these our Henry lineally descends.
Oxford, how haps it in this smooth discourse
You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost
All that which Henry the Fifth had gotten.
Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.
But, for the rest: you tell a pedigree
Of threescore and two years, a silly time
To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.
Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,
Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years,
And not bewray thy treason with a blush?
Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
For shame, leave Henry, and call Edward king.
Call him my king, by whose injurious doom
My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
Was done to death? And more than so, my father,
Even in the downfall of his mellowed years,
When nature brought him to the door of death?
No, Warwick, no. While life upholds this arm,
This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.
Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,
Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside
While I use further conference with Warwick.
Heavens grant that Warwick's words bewitch him
Now, Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,
Is Edward your true king? For I were loath
To link with him that were not lawful chosen.
Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honor.
But is he gracious in the people's eye?
The more that Henry was unfortunate.
Then further, all dissembling set aside,
Tell me for truth the measure of his love
Unto our sister Bona.
As may beseem a monarch like himself.
Myself have often heard him say and swear
That this his love was an eternal plant,
Whereof the root was fixed in virtue's ground,
The leaves and fruit maintained with beauty's sun,
Exempt from envy but not from disdain,
Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.
Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.
Your grant or your denial shall be mine.
When I have heard your king's desert recounted,
Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.
Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's.
And now forthwith shall articles be drawn
Touching the jointure that your king must make,
Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.--
Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness
That Bona shall be wife to the English king.
To Edward, but not to the English king.
Deceitful Warwick, it was thy device
By this alliance to make void my suit.
Before thy coming, Lewis was Henry's friend.
And still is friend to him and Margaret.
But if your title to the crown be weak,
As may appear by Edward's good success,
Then 'tis but reason that I be released
From giving aid which late I promised.
Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand
That your estate requires and mine can yield.
Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease,
Where, having nothing, nothing can he lose.--
And as for you yourself, our quondam queen,
You have a father able to maintain you,
And better 'twere you troubled him than France.
Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick,
Proud setter-up and puller-down of kings!
Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold
Thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love,
For both of you are birds of selfsame feather.
Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.
My lord ambassador, these letters are for you,
Sent from your brother, Marquess Montague.
Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.
Nay, mark how Lewis stamps as he were nettled.
Warwick, what are thy news? And yours, fair queen?
Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.
Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.
What, has your king married the Lady Grey,
And now, to soothe your forgery and his,
Sends me a paper to persuade me patience?
Is this th' alliance that he seeks with France?
Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?
This proveth Edward's love and Warwick's honesty.
King Lewis, I here protest in sight of heaven
And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's--
No more my king, for he dishonors me,
But most himself, if he could see his shame.
Did I forget that by the house of York
My father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass th' abuse done to my niece?
Did I impale him with the regal crown?
Did I put Henry from his native right?
And am I guerdoned at the last with shame?
Shame on himself, for my desert is honor!
And to repair my honor lost for him,
My noble queen, let former grudges pass,
And henceforth I am thy true servitor.
And replant Henry in his former state.
Warwick, these words have turned my hate to love,
And I forgive and quite forget old faults,
And joy that thou becom'st King Henry's friend.
So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend,
That if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us
With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
And force the tyrant from his seat by war.
And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,
He's very likely now to fall from him
For matching more for wanton lust than honor,
Or than for strength and safety of our country.
Dear brother, how shall Bona be revenged
But by thy help to this distressed queen?
Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live
Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?
My quarrel and this English queen's are one.
And mine, fair Lady Bona, joins with yours.
And mine with hers and thine and Margaret's.
Therefore at last I firmly am resolved
You shall have aid.
Let me give humble thanks for all, at once.
Then, England's messenger, return in post,
And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over maskers
To revel it with him and his new bride.
Thou seest what's passed; go fear thy king withal.
Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
Tell him my mourning weeds are laid aside
And I am ready to put armor on.
Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere 't be long.
There's thy reward.	
Be gone.	
Thou and Oxford with five thousand men
Shall cross the seas and bid false Edward battle;
And as occasion serves, this noble queen
And prince shall follow with a fresh supply.
Yet ere thou go, but answer me one doubt:
What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?
This shall assure my constant loyalty:
That if our queen and this young prince agree,
To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.
Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.
Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous.
Therefore, delay not; give thy hand to Warwick,
And with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,
That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine.
Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it,
And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.
Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,
And thou, Lord Bourbon, our High Admiral,
Shall waft them over with our royal fleet.
For mocking marriage with a dame of France.
But I return his sworn and mortal foe.
Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stale but me?
Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.
And I'll be chief to bring him down again:
Not that I pity Henry's misery,
But seek revenge on Edward's mockery.
Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think you
Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey?
Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?
Alas, you know 'tis far from hence to France.
How could he stay till Warwick made return?
My lords, forbear this talk. Here comes the King.
Lady Grey, now Queen Elizabeth, Pembroke, Stafford,
Hastings, and others, all wearing the white rose.
Four stand on one side, and four on the other.]
Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice,
That you stand pensive, as half malcontent?
As well as Lewis of France or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak of courage and in judgment
That they'll take no offense at our abuse.
Suppose they take offense without a cause,
They are but Lewis and Warwick; I am Edward,
Your king and Warwick's, and must have my will.
And shall have your will because our king.
Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.
Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?
No, God forbid that I should wish them severed
Whom God hath joined together. Ay, and 'twere pity
To sunder them that yoke so well together.
Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,
Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
Should not become my wife and England's queen?
And you too, Somerset and Montague,
Speak freely what you think.
Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
Becomes your enemy for mocking him
About the marriage of the Lady Bona.
And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,
Is now dishonored by this new marriage.
What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased
By such invention as I can devise?
Yet to have joined with France in such alliance
Would more have strengthened this our
Why, knows not Montague that of itself
England is safe, if true within itself?
But the safer when 'tis backed with France.
Let us be backed with God and with the seas
Which He hath giv'n for fence impregnable,
And with their helps only defend ourselves.
In them and in ourselves our safety lies.
For this one speech, Lord Hastings well deserves
To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.
Ay, what of that? It was my will and grant,
And for this once my will shall stand for law.
And yet methinks your Grace hath not done well
To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales
Unto the brother of your loving bride.
She better would have fitted me or Clarence;
But in your bride you bury brotherhood.
Or else you would not have bestowed the heir
Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,
And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.
Alas, poor Clarence, is it for a wife
That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.
In choosing for yourself you showed your judgment,
Which, being shallow, you shall give me leave
To play the broker in mine own behalf.
And to that end, I shortly mind to leave you.
Leave me or tarry, Edward will be king
And not be tied unto his brother's will.
My lords, before it pleased his Majesty
To raise my state to title of a queen,
Do me but right and you must all confess
That I was not ignoble of descent,
And meaner than myself have had like fortune.
But as this title honors me and mine,
So your dislikes, to whom I would be pleasing,
Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.
My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns.
What danger or what sorrow can befall thee
So long as Edward is thy constant friend
And their true sovereign, whom they must obey?
Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
Unless they seek for hatred at my hands;
Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.
Now, messenger, what letters or what news from
France?
My sovereign liege, no letters and few words
But such as I without your special pardon
Dare not relate.
Go to, we pardon thee. Therefore, in brief,
Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?
At my depart, these were his very words:
That Lewis of France is sending over maskers
To revel it with him and his new bride."
Is Lewis so brave? Belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to my marriage?
These were her words, uttered with mild disdain:
She had the wrong. But what said Henry's queen?
For I have heard that she was there in place.
And I am ready to put armor on."
Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?
He, more incensed against your Majesty
Than all the rest, discharged me with these words:
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere 't be long."
Ha! Durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
Well, I will arm me, being thus forewarned.
They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.
But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?
Ay, gracious sovereign, they are so linked in
That young Prince Edward marries Warwick's
Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.--
Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter,
That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage
You that love me and Warwick, follow me.
Not I. My thoughts aim at a further matter:
Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick?
Yet am I armed against the worst can happen,
And haste is needful in this desp'rate case.
Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf
Go levy men and make prepare for war.
They are already, or quickly will be, landed.
Myself in person will straight follow you.
But ere I go, Hastings and Montague,
Resolve my doubt: you twain, of all the rest,
Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance.
Tell me if you love Warwick more than me.
If it be so, then both depart to him.
But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
Give me assurance with some friendly vow,
That I may never have you in suspect.
So God help Montague as he proves true!
And Hastings as he favors Edward's cause!
Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?
Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.
Why, so. Then am I sure of victory.
Now therefore let us hence and lose no hour
Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power.
Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well.
The common people by numbers swarm to us.
But see where Somerset and Clarence comes.--
Speak suddenly, my lords: are we all friends?
Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick,
And welcome, Somerset. I hold it cowardice
To rest mistrustful where a noble heart
Hath pawned an open hand in sign of love;
Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's brother,
Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings.
But welcome, sweet Clarence; my daughter shall be
And now, what rests but, in night's coverture
Thy brother being carelessly encamped,
His soldiers lurking in the town about,
And but attended by a simple guard,
We may surprise and take him at our pleasure?
Our scouts have found the adventure very easy;
That, as Ulysses and stout Diomed
With sleight and manhood stole to Rhesus' tents
And brought from thence the Thracian fatal steeds,
So we, well covered with the night's black mantle,
At unawares may beat down Edward's guard
And seize himself. I say not "slaughter him,"
For I intend but only to surprise him.
You that will follow me to this attempt,
Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.
Why then, let's on our way in silent sort.
For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!
Come on, my masters, each man take his stand.
The King by this is set him down to sleep.
Why, no, for he hath made a solemn vow
Never to lie and take his natural rest
Till Warwick or himself be quite suppressed.
Tomorrow, then, belike shall be the day,
If Warwick be so near as men report.
But say, I pray, what nobleman is that
That with the King here resteth in his tent?
That his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
While he himself keeps in the cold field?
Ay, but give me worship and quietness;
If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.
Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent
But to defend his person from night foes?
This is his tent, and see where stand his guard.
Courage, my masters. Honor, now or never!
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.
Warwick and the rest following them.]
King Edward out in his gown, sitting in a chair.
Richard and Hastings flies over the stage.]
What are they that fly there?
Let them go. Here is the Duke.
Why, Warwick, when we parted, thou call'dst me king.
When you disgraced me in my embassade,
Then I degraded you from being king
And come now to create you Duke of York.
Alas, how should you govern any kingdom
That know not how to use ambassadors,
Nor how to be contented with one wife,
Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
Nor how to study for the people's welfare,
Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?
Yea, brother of Clarence, art thou here too?
Nay, then, I see that Edward needs must down.
Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance,
Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
Edward will always bear himself as king.
Though Fortune's malice overthrow my state,
My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.
Then for his mind be Edward England's king,
But Henry now shall wear the English crown
And be true king indeed, thou but the shadow.--
My lord of Somerset, at my request,
See that forthwith Duke Edward be conveyed
Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.
When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows,
Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.--
Now for awhile farewell, good Duke of York.
What Fates impose, that men must needs abide;
It boots not to resist both wind and tide.
What now remains, my lords, for us to do
But march to London with our soldiers?
Ay, that's the first thing that we have to do,
To free King Henry from imprisonment
And see him seated in the regal throne.
Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?
Why, brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
What late misfortune is befall'n King Edward?
What, loss of some pitched battle against Warwick?
No, but the loss of his own royal person.
Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner,
Either betrayed by falsehood of his guard
Or by his foe surprised at unawares;
And, as I further have to understand,
Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
Fell Warwick's brother and by that our foe.
These news I must confess are full of grief;
Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may.
Warwick may lose that now hath won the day.
Till then fair hope must hinder life's decay;
And I the rather wean me from despair
For love of Edward's offspring in my womb.
This is it that makes me bridle passion
And bear with mildness my misfortune's cross.
Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear
And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown
King Edward's fruit, true heir to th' English crown.
But, madam, where is Warwick then become?
To set the crown once more on Henry's head.
Guess thou the rest: King Edward's friends must
But to prevent the tyrant's violence--
For trust not him that hath once broken faith--
To save at least the heir of Edward's right.
There shall I rest secure from force and fraud.
Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly.
If Warwick take us, we are sure to die.
Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley,
Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither
Into this chiefest thicket of the park.
Thus stands the case: you know our king, my brother,
Is prisoner to the Bishop here, at whose hands
He hath good usage and great liberty,
And, often but attended with weak guard,
Comes hunting this way to disport himself.
That, if about this hour he make this way
Under the color of his usual game,
He shall here find his friends with horse and men
To set him free from his captivity.
This way, my lord, for this way lies the game.
Nay, this way, man. See where the huntsmen stand.--
Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the
Stand you thus close to steal the Bishop's deer?
Brother, the time and case requireth haste.
Your horse stands ready at the park corner.
To Lynn, my lord, and shipped from thence
Well guessed, believe me, for that was my meaning.
Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.
But wherefore stay we? 'Tis no time to talk.
Huntsman, what sayst thou? Wilt thou go along?
Better do so than tarry and be hanged.
Come then, away! Let's ha' no more ado.
Bishop, farewell; shield thee from Warwick's frown,
And pray that I may repossess the crown.
Warwick, Somerset, young Henry Earl of Richmond,
Oxford, Montague, all wearing the red rose,
Master lieutenant, now that God and friends
Have shaken Edward from the regal seat
And turned my captive state to liberty,
My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
At our enlargement what are thy due fees?
Subjects may challenge nothing of their sov'reigns,
But, if an humble prayer may prevail,
For what, lieutenant? For well using me?
Nay, be thou sure I'll well requite thy kindness,
For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure,
Ay, such a pleasure as encaged birds
Conceive when, after many moody thoughts,
At last by notes of household harmony
They quite forget their loss of liberty.--
But, Warwick, after God thou sett'st me free,
And chiefly, therefore, I thank God and thee.
He was the author, thou the instrument.
Therefore, that I may conquer Fortune's spite
By living low where Fortune cannot hurt me,
And that the people of this blessed land
May not be punished with my thwarting stars,
Warwick, although my head still wear the crown,
For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.
Your Grace hath still been famed for virtuous
And now may seem as wise as virtuous
By spying and avoiding Fortune's malice,
For few men rightly temper with the stars.
Yet, in this one thing let me blame your Grace:
For choosing me when Clarence is in place.
No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
To whom the heav'ns in thy nativity
Adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown
As likely to be blest in peace and war;
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.
And I choose Clarence only for Protector.
Warwick and Clarence, give me both your hands.
Now join your hands, and with your hands your
That no dissension hinder government.
While I myself will lead a private life
And in devotion spend my latter days,
To sin's rebuke and my Creator's praise.
What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will?
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent,
For on thy fortune I repose myself.
Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content.
We'll yoke together like a double shadow
To Henry's body, and supply his place--
While he enjoys the honor and his ease.
And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor
And all his lands and goods be confiscate.
What else? And that succession be determined.
Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.
But with the first of all your chief affairs
Let me entreat--for I command no more--
That Margaret your queen and my son Edward
Be sent for, to return from France with speed,
For till I see them here, by doubtful fear
My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.
It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.
My lord of Somerset, what youth is that
Of whom you seem to have so tender care?
My liege, it is young Henry, Earl of Richmond.
Come hither, England's hope.
If secret powers
Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts,
This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss.
His looks are full of peaceful majesty,
His head by nature framed to wear a crown,
His hand to wield a scepter, and himself
Likely in time to bless a regal throne.
Make much of him, my lords, for this is he
Must help you more than you are hurt by me.
That Edward is escaped from your brother
And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.
Unsavory news! But how made he escape?
He was conveyed by Richard, Duke of Gloucester,
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
In secret ambush on the forest side
And from the Bishop's huntsmen rescued him,
For hunting was his daily exercise.
My brother was too careless of his charge.
But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide
My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's,
For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help,
And we shall have more wars before 't be long.
As Henry's late presaging prophecy
Did glad my heart with hope of this young
Richmond,
So doth my heart misgive me in these conflicts
What may befall him, to his harm and ours.
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany
Till storms be past of civil enmity.
Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown,
It shall be so. He shall to Brittany.
Come, therefore, let's about it speedily.
Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest:
Yet thus far Fortune maketh us amends,
And says that once more I shall interchange
My waned state for Henry's regal crown.
Well have we passed, and now re-passed, the seas,
And brought desired help from Burgundy.
What then remains, we being thus arrived
From Ravenspurgh Haven before the gates of York,
But that we enter as into our dukedom?
The gates made fast? Brother, I like not this.
For many men that stumble at the threshold
Are well foretold that danger lurks within.
Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us.
By fair or foul means we must enter in,
For hither will our friends repair to us.
My liege, I'll knock once more to summon them.
My lords, we were forewarned of your coming,
And shut the gates for safety of ourselves,
For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.
But, master mayor, if Henry be your king,
Yet Edward, at the least, is Duke of York.
True, my good lord, I know you for no less.
Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,
As being well content with that alone.
But when the fox hath once got in his nose,
He'll soon find means to make the body follow.
Why, master mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
Open the gates. We are King Henry's friends.
Ay, say you so? The gates shall then be opened.
The good old man would fain that all were well,
So 'twere not long of him; but being entered,
Both him and all his brothers unto reason.
So, master mayor, these gates must not be shut
But in the night or in the time of war.
What, fear not, man, but yield me up the keys.
For Edward will defend the town and thee
And all those friends that deign to follow me.
Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,
Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.
Welcome, Sir John. But why come you in arms?
To help King Edward in his time of storm,
As every loyal subject ought to do.
Thanks, good Montgomery. But we now forget
Our title to the crown, and only claim
Our dukedom, till God please to send the rest.
Then fare you well, for I will hence again.
Drummer, strike up, and let us march away.
Nay, stay, Sir John, a while, and we'll debate
By what safe means the crown may be recovered.
What talk you of debating? In few words,
If you'll not here proclaim yourself our king,
To keep them back that come to succor you.
Why shall we fight if you pretend no title?
Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?
When we grow stronger, then we'll make our claim.
Till then 'tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.
Away with scrupulous wit! Now arms must rule.
And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.
Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand;
The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.
Then be it as you will, for 'tis my right,
And Henry but usurps the diadem.
Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself,
And now will I be Edward's champion.
Sound, trumpet! Edward shall be here proclaimed.--
Come, fellow soldier, make thou proclamation.
God, King of England and France, and Lord of
Ireland, &c.
And whosoe'er gainsays King Edward's right,
By this I challenge him to single fight.
Thanks, brave Montgomery, and thanks unto you all.
If fortune serve me, I'll requite this kindness.
Now, for this night let's harbor here in York,
And when the morning sun shall raise his car
Above the border of this horizon,
We'll forward towards Warwick and his mates;
For well I wot that Henry is no soldier.
Ah, froward Clarence, how evil it beseems thee
To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
Yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.
Come on, brave soldiers; doubt not of the day;
And that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.
Clarence, Oxford, and Exeter, all wearing the red rose.]
What counsel, lords? Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
Hath passed in safety through the Narrow Seas,
And with his troops doth march amain to London,
And many giddy people flock to him.
Let's levy men and beat him back again.
Which, being suffered, rivers cannot quench.
In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,
Not mutinous in peace yet bold in war.
Those will I muster up; and thou, son Clarence,
Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent
The knights and gentlemen to come with thee.--
Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
Northampton, and in Leicestershire shalt find
Men well inclined to hear what thou command'st.--
And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved,
In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.--
My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
Like to his island girt in with the ocean,
Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs,
Shall rest in London till we come to him.
Fair lords, take leave, and stand not to reply.--
Farewell, my sovereign.
Farewell, my Hector and my Troy's true hope.
In sign of truth, I kiss your Highness' hand.
Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate.
Comfort, my lord; and so I take my leave.
And thus I seal my truth, and bid adieu.
Sweet Oxford and my loving Montague
And all at once, once more a happy farewell.
Farewell, sweet lords. Let's meet at Coventry.
Here at the palace will I rest awhile.
Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your Lordship?
Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
Should not be able to encounter mine.
The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.
That's not my fear. My meed hath got me fame.
Nor posted off their suits with slow delays.
My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
My mildness hath allayed their swelling griefs,
My mercy dried their water-flowing tears.
Nor much oppressed them with great subsidies,
Nor forward of revenge, though they much erred.
Then why should they love Edward more than me?
No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace;
And when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
The lamb will never cease to follow him.
Hark, hark, my lord, what shouts are these?
Seize on the shamefaced Henry, bear him hence,
And once again proclaim us King of England.--
You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow.
Now stops thy spring; my sea shall suck them dry
And swell so much the higher by their ebb.--
Hence with him to the Tower. Let him not speak.
And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course,
Where peremptory Warwick now remains.
The sun shines hot, and if we use delay,
Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.
Away betimes, before his forces join,
And take the great-grown traitor unawares.
Brave warriors, march amain towards Coventry.
Coventry, two Messengers, and others, upon the walls.]
Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?--
How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?
By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.
How far off is our brother Montague?
Where is the post that came from Montague?
By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.	
Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?
And, by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?
At Southam I did leave him with his forces
And do expect him here some two hours hence.
Then Clarence is at hand; I hear his drum.
It is not his, my lord; here Southam lies.
The drum your Honor hears marcheth from Warwick.
Who should that be? Belike unlooked-for friends.
They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.
Richard, and Soldiers, including a Trumpeter,
Go, Trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.
See how the surly Warwick mans the wall.
Where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced,
That we could hear no news of his repair?
Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
Speak gentle words, and humbly bend thy knee?
Call Edward king, and at his hands beg mercy,
And he shall pardon thee these outrages.
Nay, rather wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
Confess who set thee up and plucked thee down,
Call Warwick patron, and be penitent,
And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.
Or did he make the jest against his will?
Is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?
Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give.
Why, then, 'tis mine, if but by Warwick's gift.
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight;
And, weakling, Warwick takes his gift again,
And Henry is my king, Warwick his subject.
But Warwick's king is Edward's prisoner.
And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:
What is the body when the head is off?
Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
But whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
The King was slyly fingered from the deck.
You left poor Henry at the Bishop's palace,
And ten to one you'll meet him in the Tower.
Come, Warwick, take the time; kneel down, kneel
Nay, when? Strike now, or else the iron cools.
And with the other fling it at thy face
Than bear so low a sail to strike to thee.
Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,
This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair,
Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,
Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood:
The gates are open; let us enter too.
So other foes may set upon our backs.
Stand we in good array, for they no doubt
Will issue out again and bid us battle.
If not, the city being but of small defense,
We'll quickly rouse the traitors in the same.
Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear!
The harder matched, the greater victory.
My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.
Two of thy name, both dukes of Somerset,
Have sold their lives unto the house of York,
And thou shalt be the third, if this sword hold.
And lo, where George of Clarence sweeps along,
Of force enough to bid his brother battle,
With whom an upright zeal to right prevails
More than the nature of a brother's love.--
Come, Clarence, come; thou wilt, if Warwick call.
Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
Look, here I throw my infamy at thee.
Who gave his blood to lime the stones together
And set up Lancaster. Why, trowest thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
To bend the fatal instruments of war
Against his brother and his lawful king?
Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath.
To keep that oath were more impiety
Than Jephthah when he sacrificed his daughter.
That, to deserve well at my brother's hands,
With resolution, wheresoe'er I meet thee--
As I will meet thee if thou stir abroad--
To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee
And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.--
Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends.--
And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.
Now, welcome more, and ten times more beloved,
Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.
Welcome, good Clarence; this is brother-like.
What, Warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?
Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?
Alas, I am not cooped here for defense.
And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou dar'st.
Yes, Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way.--
Lords, to the field! Saint George and victory!
So, lie thou there. Die thou, and die our fear,
For Warwick was a bug that feared us all.
Now, Montague, sit fast. I seek for thee,
That Warwick's bones may keep thine company.
Ah, who is nigh? Come to me, friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick?
Why ask I that? My mangled body shows,
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows
That I must yield my body to the earth
And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge,
Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle,
Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
Whose top branch overpeered Jove's spreading tree
And kept low shrubs from winter's pow'rful wind.
These eyes, that now are dimmed with death's black
Have been as piercing as the midday sun
To search the secret treasons of the world.
The wrinkles in my brows, now filled with blood,
Were likened oft to kingly sepulchers,
For who lived king but I could dig his grave?
And who durst smile when Warwick bent his brow?
Lo, now my glory smeared in dust and blood!
My parks, my walks, my manors that I had
Even now forsake me; and of all my lands
Is nothing left me but my body's length.
Why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
And live we how we can, yet die we must.
Ah, Warwick, Warwick, wert thou as we are,
We might recover all our loss again.
The Queen from France hath brought a puissant
Even now we heard the news. Ah, could'st thou fly--
Why, then, I would not fly. Ah, Montague,
If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand
And with thy lips keep in my soul awhile.
Thou lov'st me not, for, brother, if thou didst,
Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood
That glues my lips and will not let me speak.
Come quickly, Montague, or I am dead.
Ah, Warwick, Montague hath breathed his last,
And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
And said "Commend me to my valiant brother."
And more he would have said, and more he spoke,
Which sounded like a cannon in a vault,
That mought not be distinguished, but at last
Sweet rest his soul! Fly, lords, and save yourselves,
For Warwick bids you all farewell to meet in heaven.
Away, away, to meet the Queen's great power!
Clarence, and the rest, all wearing the white rose.]
Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
And we are graced with wreaths of victory.
But in the midst of this bright-shining day,
That will encounter with our glorious sun
Ere he attain his easeful western bed.
Hath raised in Gallia have arrived our coast
And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.
And blow it to the source from whence it came;
Thy very beams will dry those vapors up,
For every cloud engenders not a storm.
The Queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
And Somerset, with Oxford, fled to her.
If she have time to breathe, be well assured
Her faction will be full as strong as ours.
We are advertised by our loving friends
That they do hold their course toward Tewkesbury.
We having now the best at Barnet Field
Will thither straight, for willingness rids way,
And, as we march, our strength will be augmented
In every county as we go along.
Strike up the drum, cry "Courage!" and away.
Great lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their loss
But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
What though the mast be now blown overboard,
The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
And half our sailors swallowed in the flood?
Yet lives our pilot still. Is 't meet that he
Should leave the helm and, like a fearful lad,
With tearful eyes add water to the sea
And give more strength to that which hath too much,
Whiles in his moan the ship splits on the rock,
Which industry and courage might have saved?
Ah, what a shame, ah, what a fault were this!
Say Warwick was our anchor; what of that?
And Montague our topmast; what of him?
Our slaughtered friends the tackles; what of these?
Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
And Somerset another goodly mast?
The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?
And, though unskillful, why not Ned and I
For once allowed the skillful pilot's charge?
We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wrack.
As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
And what is Edward but a ruthless sea?
What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit?
And Richard but a ragged fatal rock--
All these the enemies to our poor bark?
Say you can swim: alas, 'tis but awhile;
Tread on the sand: why, there you quickly sink;
Bestride the rock: the tide will wash you off
Or else you famish; that's a threefold death.
This speak I, lords, to let you understand,
If case some one of you would fly from us,
That there's no hoped-for mercy with the brothers
More than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks.
Why, courage then! What cannot be avoided
Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit
Should, if a coward heard her speak these words,
Infuse his breast with magnanimity
And make him, naked, foil a man-at-arms.
For did I but suspect a fearful man,
He should have leave to go away betimes,
Lest in our need he might infect another
And make him of like spirit to himself.
If any such be here, as God forbid,
Let him depart before we need his help.
Women and children of so high a courage,
And warriors faint? Why, 'twere perpetual shame!
Doth live again in thee. Long mayst thou live
To bear his image and renew his glories!
And he that will not fight for such a hope,
Go home to bed and, like the owl by day,
If he arise, be mocked and wondered at.
Thanks, gentle Somerset.--Sweet Oxford, thanks.
And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.
Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand,
Ready to fight. Therefore be resolute.	
To haste thus fast to find us unprovided.
But he's deceived. We are in readiness.
This cheers my heart to see your forwardness.
Here pitch our battle; hence we will not budge.
Clarence, and Soldiers, all wearing the white rose.]
Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood
Which by the heavens' assistance and your strength
Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
For, well I wot, you blaze to burn them out.
Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!
Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say
My tears gainsay, for every word I speak
You see I drink the water of my eye.
Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign,
Is prisoner to the foe, his state usurped,
His realm a slaughterhouse, his subjects slain,
His statutes cancelled and his treasure spent,
And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.
You fight in justice. Then, in God's name, lords,
Be valiant, and give signal to the fight!
Clarence, all wearing the white rose, with Soldiers
Now here a period of tumultuous broils.
Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight.
For Somerset, off with his guilty head.
Go bear them hence. I will not hear them speak.
For my part, I'll not trouble thee with words.
Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.
So part we sadly in this troublous world
To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.
Is proclamation made that who finds Edward
Shall have a high reward, and he his life?
It is, and lo where youthful Edward comes.
Bring forth the gallant; let us hear him speak.
What, can so young a thorn begin to prick?--
Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make
For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,
And all the trouble thou hast turned me to?
Speak like a subject, proud ambitious York.
Suppose that I am now my father's mouth:
Resign thy chair, and where I stand, kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee
Which, traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.
Ah, that thy father had been so resolved!
That you might still have worn the petticoat
And ne'er have stol'n the breech from Lancaster.
Let Aesop fable in a winter's night;
His currish riddles sorts not with this place.
By heaven, brat, I'll plague you for that word.
Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.
For God's sake, take away this captive scold.
Nay, take away this scolding crookback, rather.
Peace, willful boy, or I will charm your tongue.
Untutored lad, thou art too malapert.
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou misshapen Dick, I tell you all
And thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.
Take that, the likeness of this railer here!	
Sprawl'st thou? Take that to end thy agony!
And there's for twitting me with perjury.
Hold, Richard, hold, for we have done too much.
Why should she live to fill the world with words?
What, doth she swoon? Use means for her recovery.
Clarence, excuse me to the King my brother.
Ere you come there, be sure to hear some news.
Canst thou not speak? O traitors, murderers!
They that stabbed Caesar shed no blood at all,
Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,
If this foul deed were by to equal it.
He was a man; this, in respect, a child,
And men ne'er spend their fury on a child.
What's worse than murderer, that I may name it?
No, no, my heart will burst an if I speak,
And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
Butchers and villains, bloody cannibals,
How sweet a plant have you untimely cropped!
You have no children, butchers. If you had,
The thought of them would have stirred up remorse.
But if you ever chance to have a child,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off
As, deathsmen, you have rid this sweet young prince.
Away with her. Go bear her hence perforce.
Nay, never bear me hence! Dispatch me here.
Here sheathe thy sword; I'll pardon thee my death.
What, wilt thou not?--Then, Clarence, do it thou.
By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.
Good Clarence, do! Sweet Clarence, do thou do it.
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?
Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself.
What, wilt thou not? Where is that devil's butcher,
Richard,
Hard-favored Richard? Richard, where art thou?
Thou art not here. Murder is thy alms-deed;
Petitioners for blood thou ne'er putt'st back.
Away, I say!  I charge you bear her
So come to you and yours as to this prince!
Soldiers carry off Prince Edward's body.]
To London all in post, and, as I guess,
To make a bloody supper in the Tower.
He's sudden if a thing comes in his head.
Now march we hence. Discharge the common sort
With pay and thanks, and let's away to London
And see our gentle queen how well she fares.
By this I hope she hath a son for me.
Good day, my lord. What, at your book so hard?
Ay, my good lord--"my lord," I should say rather.
And both preposterous: therefore, not "good lord."
Sirrah, leave us to ourselves; we must confer.
So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf;
So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece
And next his throat unto the butcher's knife.
What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind;
The thief doth fear each bush an officer.
The bird that hath been limed in a bush,
With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush;
And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,
Have now the fatal object in my eye
Where my poor young was limed, was caught, and
Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete
That taught his son the office of a fowl!
And yet, for all his wings, the fool was drowned.
Thy father Minos, that denied our course;
The sun that seared the wings of my sweet boy
Thy brother Edward, and thyself the sea
Whose envious gulf did swallow up his life.
Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
My breast can better brook thy dagger's point
Than can my ears that tragic history.
But wherefore dost thou come? Is 't for my life?
Think'st thou I am an executioner?
If murdering innocents be executing,
Why, then, thou art an executioner.
Thy son I killed for his presumption.
Hadst thou been killed when first thou didst presume,
Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine.
And thus I prophesy: that many a thousand
Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
And many an old man's sigh, and many a widow's
And many an orphan's water-standing eye,
Men for their sons, wives for their husbands,
Orphans for their parents' timeless death,
Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
The owl shrieked at thy birth, an evil sign;
The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time;
Dogs howled, and hideous tempest shook down trees;
The raven rooked her on the chimney's top;
And chatt'ring pies in dismal discords sung;
Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
And yet brought forth less than a mother's hope:
To wit, an indigested and deformed lump,
Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born
To signify thou cam'st to bite the world.
And if the rest be true which I have heard,
Thou cam'st--
For this amongst the rest was I ordained.
Ay, and for much more slaughter after this.
What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps for the poor king's death.
From those that wish the downfall of our house.
If any spark of life be yet remaining,
Down, down to hell, and say I sent thee thither--
Indeed, 'tis true that Henry told me of,
For I have often heard my mother say
Had I not reason, think you, to make haste
And seek their ruin that usurped our right?
The midwife wondered, and the women cried
And so I was, which plainly signified
That I should snarl, and bite, and play the dog.
Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so,
Let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it.
And this word "love," which graybeards call divine,
Be resident in men like one another
And not in me. I am myself alone.
Clarence, beware; thou keep'st me from the light,
But I will sort a pitchy day for thee;
For I will buzz abroad such prophecies
That Edward shall be fearful of his life;
And then to purge his fear, I'll be thy death.
King Henry and the Prince his son are gone.
Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest,
Counting myself but bad till I be best.
And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.
Clarence, Richard of Gloucester, Hastings, Nurse,
Once more we sit in England's royal throne,
Repurchased with the blood of enemies.
What valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn,
Have we mowed down in tops of all their pride!
Three dukes of Somerset, threefold renowned
For hardy and undoubted champions;
Two Cliffords, as the father and the son;
And two Northumberlands; two braver men
Ne'er spurred their coursers at the trumpet's sound.
With them the two brave bears, Warwick and
Montague,
That in their chains fettered the kingly lion
And made the forest tremble when they roared.
Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat
And made our footstool of security.--
Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.--
Young Ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself
Have in our armors watched the winter's night,
Went all afoot in summer's scalding heat,
That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace,
And of our labors thou shalt reap the gain.
For yet I am not looked on in the world.
This shoulder was ordained so thick to heave,
And heave it shall some weight or break my back.
Work thou the way and that shalt execute.
Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen,
And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.
The duty that I owe unto your Majesty
Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks.
And that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st,
Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.
And cried "All hail!" whenas he meant all harm.
Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.
What will your Grace have done with Margaret?
Reignier, her father, to the King of France
Hath pawned the Sicils and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.
Away with her, and waft her hence to France.
And now what rests but that we spend the time
With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
Sound drums and trumpets! Farewell, sour annoy,
For here I hope begins our lasting joy.
The brightest heaven of invention!
And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!
Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,
Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels,
Leashed in like hounds, should famine, sword, and
Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all,
The flat unraised spirits that hath dared
On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth
So great an object. Can this cockpit hold
The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram
Within this wooden O the very casques
That did affright the air at Agincourt?
Attest in little place a million,
And let us, ciphers to this great account,
On your imaginary forces work.
Suppose within the girdle of these walls
Are now confined two mighty monarchies,
Whose high upreared and abutting fronts
The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder.
Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts.
Into a thousand parts divide one man,
And make imaginary puissance.
Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them
Printing their proud hoofs i' th' receiving earth,
For 'tis your thoughts that now must deck our
Carry them here and there, jumping o'er times,
Turning th' accomplishment of many years
Into an hourglass; for the which supply,
Admit me chorus to this history,
Who, prologue-like, your humble patience pray
Gently to hear, kindly to judge our play.
My lord, I'll tell you that self bill is urged
Which in th' eleventh year of the last king's reign
Was like, and had indeed against us passed
But that the scambling and unquiet time
Did push it out of farther question.
But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?
It must be thought on. If it pass against us,
We lose the better half of our possession,
For all the temporal lands which men devout
By testament have given to the Church
Would they strip from us, being valued thus:
Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights,
Six thousand and two hundred good esquires;
And, to relief of lazars and weak age
Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil,
And to the coffers of the King besides,
This would drink deep.
The King is full of grace and fair regard.
And a true lover of the holy Church.
The courses of his youth promised it not.
The breath no sooner left his father's body
But that his wildness, mortified in him,
Seemed to die too. Yea, at that very moment
Consideration like an angel came
And whipped th' offending Adam out of him,
Leaving his body as a paradise
Never was such a sudden scholar made,
Never came reformation in a flood
With such a heady currance scouring faults,
Nor never Hydra-headed willfulness
So soon did lose his seat, and all at once,
As in this king.
Hear him but reason in divinity
And, all-admiring, with an inward wish
You would desire the King were made a prelate;
Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs,
You would say it hath been all in all his study;
List his discourse of war, and you shall hear
Turn him to any cause of policy,
The Gordian knot of it he will unloose
Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks,
The air, a chartered libertine, is still,
And the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears
To steal his sweet and honeyed sentences;
So that the art and practic part of life
Must be the mistress to this theoric;
Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it,
Since his addiction was to courses vain,
His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow,
His hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports,
And never noted in him any study,
Any retirement, any sequestration
From open haunts and popularity.
The strawberry grows underneath the nettle,
And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best
Neighbored by fruit of baser quality;
And so the Prince obscured his contemplation
Under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt,
Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night,
Unseen yet crescive in his faculty.
It must be so, for miracles are ceased,
And therefore we must needs admit the means
How things are perfected.
How now for mitigation of this bill
Urged by the Commons? Doth his Majesty
Incline to it or no?
Or rather swaying more upon our part
Than cherishing th' exhibitors against us;
For I have made an offer to his Majesty--
Upon our spiritual convocation
And in regard of causes now in hand,
Which I have opened to his Grace at large,
As touching France--to give a greater sum
Than ever at one time the clergy yet
Did to his predecessors part withal.
How did this offer seem received, my lord?
With good acceptance of his Majesty--
Save that there was not time enough to hear,
As I perceived his Grace would fain have done,
The severals and unhidden passages
Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms,
And generally to the crown and seat of France,
Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.
What was th' impediment that broke this off?
The French ambassador upon that instant
Craved audience. And the hour, I think, is come
To give him hearing. Is it four o'clock?
Then go we in to know his embassy,
Which I could with a ready guess declare
Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.
Gloucester, Bedford, Clarence, Warwick, Westmoreland,
Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury?
Not here in presence.
Shall we call in th' Ambassador, my liege?
Not yet, my cousin. We would be resolved,
Before we hear him, of some things of weight
That task our thoughts concerning us and France.
God and his angels guard your sacred throne
And make you long become it.
My learned lord, we pray you to proceed
And justly and religiously unfold
Why the law Salic that they have in France
Or should or should not bar us in our claim.
And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord,
That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your
Or nicely charge your understanding soul
With opening titles miscreate, whose right
Suits not in native colors with the truth;
For God doth know how many now in health
Shall drop their blood in approbation
Of what your reverence shall incite us to.
Therefore take heed how you impawn our person,
How you awake our sleeping sword of war.
We charge you in the name of God, take heed,
For never two such kingdoms did contend
Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops
Are every one a woe, a sore complaint
That makes such waste in brief mortality.
Under this conjuration, speak, my lord,
For we will hear, note, and believe in heart
That what you speak is in your conscience washed
As pure as sin with baptism.
Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers
That owe yourselves, your lives, and services
To this imperial throne. There is no bar
To make against your Highness' claim to France
But this, which they produce from Pharamond:
Which Salic land the French unjustly gloze
To be the realm of France, and Pharamond
The founder of this law and female bar.
Yet their own authors faithfully affirm
That the land Salic is in Germany,
Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe,
Where Charles the Great, having subdued the
Saxons,
There left behind and settled certain French,
Who, holding in disdain the German women
For some dishonest manners of their life,
Established then this law: to wit, no female
Should be inheritrix in Salic land,
Which "Salic," as I said, 'twixt Elbe and Sala
Is at this day in Germany called Meissen.
Then doth it well appear the Salic law
Was not devised for the realm of France,
Nor did the French possess the Salic land
Until four hundred one and twenty years
After defunction of King Pharamond,
Idly supposed the founder of this law,
Who died within the year of our redemption
Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great
Subdued the Saxons and did seat the French
Beyond the river Sala in the year
Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say,
King Pepin, which deposed Childeric,
Did, as heir general, being descended
Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair,
Make claim and title to the crown of France.
Hugh Capet also, who usurped the crown
Of Charles the Duke of Lorraine, sole heir male
Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great,
To find his title with some shows of truth,
Though in pure truth it was corrupt and naught,
Conveyed himself as th' heir to th' Lady Lingare,
Daughter to Charlemagne, who was the son
To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son
Of Charles the Great. Also King Lewis the Tenth,
Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet,
Could not keep quiet in his conscience,
Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied
That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother,
Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare,
Daughter to Charles the foresaid Duke of Lorraine:
By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great
Was reunited to the crown of France.
So that, as clear as is the summer's sun,
King Pepin's title and Hugh Capet's claim,
King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear
To hold in right and title of the female.
So do the kings of France unto this day,
Howbeit they would hold up this Salic law
To bar your Highness claiming from the female,
And rather choose to hide them in a net
Than amply to imbar their crooked titles
Usurped from you and your progenitors.
May I with right and conscience make this claim?
The sin upon my head, dread sovereign,
For in the Book of Numbers is it writ:
Descend unto the daughter." Gracious lord,
Stand for your own, unwind your bloody flag,
Look back into your mighty ancestors.
Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire's tomb,
From whom you claim; invoke his warlike spirit
And your great-uncle's, Edward the Black Prince,
Who on the French ground played a tragedy,
Making defeat on the full power of France
Whiles his most mighty father on a hill
Stood smiling to behold his lion's whelp
Forage in blood of French nobility.
With half their forces the full pride of France
And let another half stand laughing by,
All out of work and cold for action!
Awake remembrance of these valiant dead
And with your puissant arm renew their feats.
You are their heir, you sit upon their throne,
The blood and courage that renowned them
Runs in your veins; and my thrice-puissant liege
Is in the very May-morn of his youth,
Ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises.
Your brother kings and monarchs of the Earth
Do all expect that you should rouse yourself
As did the former lions of your blood.
They know your Grace hath cause and means and
So hath your Highness. Never king of England
Had nobles richer, and more loyal subjects,
Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England
And lie pavilioned in the fields of France.
With blood and sword and fire to win your right,
In aid whereof we of the spiritualty
Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum
As never did the clergy at one time
Bring in to any of your ancestors.
We must not only arm t' invade the French,
But lay down our proportions to defend
Against the Scot, who will make road upon us
With all advantages.
They of those marches, gracious sovereign,
Shall be a wall sufficient to defend
Our inland from the pilfering borderers.
We do not mean the coursing snatchers only,
But fear the main intendment of the Scot,
Who hath been still a giddy neighbor to us.
For you shall read that my great-grandfather
Never went with his forces into France
But that the Scot on his unfurnished kingdom
Came pouring like the tide into a breach
With ample and brim fullness of his force,
Galling the gleaned land with hot assays,
Girding with grievous siege castles and towns,
That England, being empty of defense,
Hath shook and trembled at th' ill neighborhood.
She hath been then more feared than harmed, my
For hear her but exampled by herself:
When all her chivalry hath been in France
And she a mourning widow of her nobles,
She hath herself not only well defended
But taken and impounded as a stray
The King of Scots, whom she did send to France
To fill King Edward's fame with prisoner kings
And make her chronicle as rich with praise
As is the ooze and bottom of the sea
With sunken wrack and sumless treasuries.
But there's a saying very old and true:
For once the eagle England being in prey,
To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot
Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs,
Playing the mouse in absence of the cat,
To 'tame and havoc more than she can eat.
It follows, then, the cat must stay at home.
Yet that is but a crushed necessity,
Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries
And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.
While that the armed hand doth fight abroad,
Th' advised head defends itself at home.
For government, though high and low and lower,
Put into parts, doth keep in one consent,
Congreeing in a full and natural close,
Like music.
The state of man in divers functions,
Setting endeavor in continual motion,
To which is fixed as an aim or butt
Obedience; for so work the honeybees,
Creatures that by a rule in nature teach
The act of order to a peopled kingdom.
They have a king and officers of sorts,
Where some like magistrates correct at home,
Others like merchants venture trade abroad,
Others like soldiers armed in their stings
Make boot upon the summer's velvet buds,
Which pillage they with merry march bring home
To the tent royal of their emperor,
Who, busied in his majesty, surveys
The singing masons building roofs of gold,
The civil citizens kneading up the honey,
The poor mechanic porters crowding in
Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate,
The sad-eyed justice with his surly hum
Delivering o'er to executors pale
The lazy yawning drone. I this infer:
That many things, having full reference
To one consent, may work contrariously,
As many arrows loosed several ways
Come to one mark, as many ways meet in one town,
As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea,
As many lines close in the dial's center,
So may a thousand actions, once afoot,
End in one purpose and be all well borne
Without defeat. Therefore to France, my liege!
Divide your happy England into four,
Whereof take you one quarter into France,
And you withal shall make all Gallia shake.
If we, with thrice such powers left at home,
Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
Let us be worried, and our nation lose
The name of hardiness and policy.
Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin.
Now are we well resolved, and by God's help
And yours, the noble sinews of our power,
France being ours, we'll bend it to our awe
Or break it all to pieces. Or there we'll sit,
Ruling in large and ample empery
Or lay these bones in an unworthy urn,
Tombless, with no remembrance over them.
Either our history shall with full mouth
Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave,
Like Turkish mute, shall have a tongueless mouth,
Not worshiped with a waxen epitaph.
Now are we well prepared to know the pleasure
Of our fair cousin Dauphin, for we hear
Your greeting is from him, not from the King.
May 't please your Majesty to give us leave
Freely to render what we have in charge,
Or shall we sparingly show you far off
The Dauphin's meaning and our embassy?
We are no tyrant, but a Christian king,
Unto whose grace our passion is as subject
As is our wretches fettered in our prisons.
Therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness
Tell us the Dauphin's mind.
Your Highness, lately sending into France,
Did claim some certain dukedoms in the right
Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third;
In answer of which claim, the Prince our master
Says that you savor too much of your youth
And bids you be advised there's naught in France
That can be with a nimble galliard won;
You cannot revel into dukedoms there.
He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,
This tun of treasure and, in lieu of this,
Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim
Hear no more of you. This the Dauphin speaks.
What treasure, uncle?
We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us.
His present and your pains we thank you for.
When we have matched our rackets to these balls,
We will in France, by God's grace, play a set
Shall strike his father's crown into the hazard.
Tell him he hath made a match with such a
That all the courts of France will be disturbed
With chases. And we understand him well,
How he comes o'er us with our wilder days,
Not measuring what use we made of them.
We never valued this poor seat of England,
And therefore, living hence, did give ourself
To barbarous license, as 'tis ever common
That men are merriest when they are from home.
But tell the Dauphin I will keep my state,
Be like a king, and show my sail of greatness
When I do rouse me in my throne of France,
For that I have laid by my majesty
And plodded like a man for working days;
But I will rise there with so full a glory
That I will dazzle all the eyes of France,
Yea, strike the Dauphin blind to look on us.
And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his
Hath turned his balls to gun-stones, and his soul
Shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance
That shall fly with them; for many a thousand
Shall this his mock mock out of their dear husbands,
Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down;
And some are yet ungotten and unborn
That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin's scorn.
But this lies all within the will of God,
To whom I do appeal, and in whose name
Tell you the Dauphin I am coming on,
To venge me as I may and to put forth
My rightful hand in a well-hallowed cause.
So get you hence in peace. And tell the Dauphin
His jest will savor but of shallow wit
When thousands weep more than did laugh at it.--
Convey them with safe conduct.--Fare you well.
We hope to make the sender blush at it.
Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour
That may give furth'rance to our expedition;
For we have now no thought in us but France,
Save those to God, that run before our business.
Therefore let our proportions for these wars
Be soon collected, and all things thought upon
That may with reasonable swiftness add
More feathers to our wings. For, God before,
We'll chide this Dauphin at his father's door.
Therefore let every man now task his thought,
That this fair action may on foot be brought.
Now all the youth of England are on fire,
And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies;
Now thrive the armorers, and honor's thought
Reigns solely in the breast of every man.
They sell the pasture now to buy the horse,
Following the mirror of all Christian kings
With winged heels, as English Mercurys.
For now sits Expectation in the air
And hides a sword, from hilts unto the point,
With crowns imperial, crowns, and coronets
Promised to Harry and his followers.
The French, advised by good intelligence
Of this most dreadful preparation,
Shake in their fear, and with pale policy
Seek to divert the English purposes.
Like little body with a mighty heart,
What might'st thou do, that honor would thee do,
Were all thy children kind and natural!
But see, thy fault France hath in thee found out,
With treacherous crowns, and three corrupted men--
One, Richard, Earl of Cambridge, and the second,
Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third,
Sir Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland--
Have, for the gilt of France ,
Confirmed conspiracy with fearful France,
And by their hands this grace of kings must die,
If hell and treason hold their promises,
Ere he take ship for France, and in Southampton.
Linger your patience on, and we'll digest
Th' abuse of distance, force a play.
The sum is paid, the traitors are agreed,
The King is set from London, and the scene
Is now transported, gentles, to Southampton.
There is the playhouse now, there must you sit,
And thence to France shall we convey you safe
And bring you back, charming the narrow seas
To give you gentle pass; for, if we may,
We'll not offend one stomach with our play.
But, till the King come forth, and not till then,
Unto Southampton do we shift our scene.
France. Let 't be so, good Corporal Nym.
Nell Quickly, and certainly she did you wrong, for
It must be as it may. Though patience be a tired
Well, I cannot tell.
Good corporal, be patient here.--How now, mine
The grave doth gape, and doting death is near.
Therefore exhale.
Give me thy fist, thy forefoot to me give. Thy spirits
Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse. I
Good husband, come home presently.
Let floods o'erswell and fiends for food howl on!
For I shall sutler be unto the camp, and profits will
They shall be apprehended by and by.
How smooth and even they do bear themselves,
As if allegiance in their bosoms sat
Crowned with faith and constant loyalty.
The King hath note of all that they intend,
By interception which they dream not of.
Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow,
Whom he hath dulled and cloyed with gracious
That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell
His sovereign's life to death and treachery!
Scroop, Cambridge, and Grey, with Attendants.]
Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard.--
My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of
Masham,
And you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts.
Think you not that the powers we bear with us
Will cut their passage through the force of France,
Doing the execution and the act
For which we have in head assembled them?
No doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.
We carry not a heart with us from hence
That grows not in a fair consent with ours,
Nor leave not one behind that doth not wish
Success and conquest to attend on us.
Never was monarch better feared and loved
Than is your Majesty. There's not, I think, a subject
That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness
Under the sweet shade of your government.
True. Those that were your father's enemies
Have steeped their galls in honey, and do serve you
With hearts create of duty and of zeal.
We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
And shall forget the office of our hand
Sooner than quittance of desert and merit
According to the weight and worthiness.
So service shall with steeled sinews toil,
And labor shall refresh itself with hope
To do your Grace incessant services.
We judge no less.--Uncle of Exeter,
Enlarge the man committed yesterday
That railed against our person. We consider
It was excess of wine that set him on,
And on his more advice we pardon him.
That's mercy, but too much security.
Let him be punished, sovereign, lest example
Breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.
So may your Highness, and yet punish too.
Sir, you show great mercy if you give him life
After the taste of much correction.
Alas, your too much love and care of me
Are heavy orisons 'gainst this poor wretch.
If little faults proceeding on distemper
Shall not be winked at, how shall we stretch our eye
When capital crimes, chewed, swallowed, and
Appear before us? We'll yet enlarge that man,
Though Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in their dear
And tender preservation of our person,
Would have him punished. And now to our French
Who are the late commissioners?
Your Highness bade me ask for it today.
Then Richard, Earl of Cambridge, there is yours--
There yours, Lord Scroop of Masham.--And, sir
Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours.--
Read them, and know I know your worthiness.--
My Lord of Westmoreland and uncle Exeter,
We will aboard tonight.--Why how now, gentlemen?
What see you in those papers, that you lose
So much complexion?--Look you, how they change.
Their cheeks are paper.--Why, what read you there
That have so cowarded and chased your blood
Out of appearance?
And do submit me to your Highness' mercy.
The mercy that was quick in us but late
By your own counsel is suppressed and killed.
You must not dare, for shame, to talk of mercy,
For your own reasons turn into your bosoms
As dogs upon their masters, worrying you.--
See you, my princes and my noble peers,
These English monsters. My Lord of Cambridge
You know how apt our love was to accord
To furnish him with all appurtenants
Belonging to his honor, and this man
Hath, for a few light crowns, lightly conspired
And sworn unto the practices of France
To kill us here in Hampton; to the which
This knight, no less for bounty bound to us
Than Cambridge is, hath likewise sworn.--But O,
What shall I say to thee, Lord Scroop, thou cruel,
Ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature?
Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels,
That knew'st the very bottom of my soul,
That almost mightst have coined me into gold,
Wouldst thou have practiced on me for thy use--
May it be possible that foreign hire
Could out of thee extract one spark of evil
That might annoy my finger? 'Tis so strange
That, though the truth of it stands off as gross
As black and white, my eye will scarcely see it.
Treason and murder ever kept together,
As two yoke-devils sworn to either's purpose,
Working so grossly in a natural cause
That admiration did not whoop at them.
But thou, 'gainst all proportion, didst bring in
Wonder to wait on treason and on murder,
And whatsoever cunning fiend it was
That wrought upon thee so preposterously
Hath got the voice in hell for excellence.
All other devils that suggest by treasons
Do botch and bungle up damnation
With patches, colors, and with forms being fetched
From glist'ring semblances of piety;
But he that tempered thee bade thee stand up,
Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason,
Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor.
If that same demon that hath gulled thee thus
Should with his lion gait walk the whole world,
He might return to vasty Tartar back
And tell the legions "I can never win
The sweetness of affiance! Show men dutiful?
Why, so didst thou. Seem they grave and learned?
Why, so didst thou. Come they of noble family?
Why, so didst thou. Seem they religious?
Why, so didst thou. Or are they spare in diet,
Free from gross passion or of mirth or anger,
Constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood,
Garnished and decked in modest complement,
Not working with the eye without the ear,
And but in purged judgment trusting neither?
Such and so finely bolted didst thou seem.
And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot
To mark the full-fraught man and best endued
With some suspicion. I will weep for thee,
For this revolt of thine methinks is like
Another fall of man.--Their faults are open.
Arrest them to the answer of the law,
And God acquit them of their practices.
Richard, Earl of Cambridge.--
Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham.--
Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland.
Our purposes God justly hath discovered,
And I repent my fault more than my death,
Which I beseech your Highness to forgive,
Although my body pay the price of it.
For me, the gold of France did not seduce,
Although I did admit it as a motive
The sooner to effect what I intended;
But God be thanked for prevention,
Which I in sufferance heartily will rejoice,
Beseeching God and you to pardon me.
Never did faithful subject more rejoice
At the discovery of most dangerous treason
Than I do at this hour joy o'er myself,
Prevented from a damned enterprise.
My fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.
God quit you in His mercy. Hear your sentence:
You have conspired against our royal person,
Joined with an enemy proclaimed, and from his
Received the golden earnest of our death,
Wherein you would have sold your king to
His princes and his peers to servitude,
His subjects to oppression and contempt,
And his whole kingdom into desolation.
Touching our person, seek we no revenge,
But we our kingdom's safety must so tender,
Whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws
We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence,
Poor miserable wretches, to your death,
The taste whereof God of His mercy give
You patience to endure, and true repentance
Of all your dear offenses.--Bear them hence.
Now, lords, for France, the enterprise whereof
Shall be to you as us, like glorious.
We doubt not of a fair and lucky war,
Since God so graciously hath brought to light
This dangerous treason lurking in our way
To hinder our beginnings. We doubt not now
But every rub is smoothed on our way.
Then forth, dear countrymen. Let us deliver
Our puissance into the hand of God,
Putting it straight in expedition.
Cheerly to sea. The signs of war advance.
No king of England if not king of France.
Bardolph's nose, and he said it was a black soul
Southampton.
Let senses rule. The word is "Pitch and pay." Trust
Therefore, Caveto be thy counselor. Go, clear thy
Thus comes the English with full power upon us,
And more than carefully it us concerns
To answer royally in our defenses.
Therefore the Dukes of Berri and of Brittany,
Of Brabant and of Orleans, shall make forth,
And you, Prince Dauphin, with all swift dispatch,
To line and new-repair our towns of war
With men of courage and with means defendant.
For England his approaches makes as fierce
As waters to the sucking of a gulf.
It fits us then to be as provident
As fear may teach us out of late examples
Left by the fatal and neglected English
Upon our fields.
It is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe,
For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom,
Though war nor no known quarrel were in question
But that defenses, musters, preparations
Should be maintained, assembled, and collected
As were a war in expectation.
Therefore I say 'tis meet we all go forth
To view the sick and feeble parts of France.
And let us do it with no show of fear,
No, with no more than if we heard that England
Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance.
For, my good liege, she is so idly kinged,
Her scepter so fantastically borne
By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth,
That fear attends her not.
You are too much mistaken in this king.
Question your Grace the late ambassadors
With what great state he heard their embassy,
How well supplied with noble councillors,
How modest in exception, and withal
How terrible in constant resolution,
And you shall find his vanities forespent
Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,
Covering discretion with a coat of folly,
As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots
That shall first spring and be most delicate.
Well, 'tis not so, my Lord High Constable.
But though we think it so, it is no matter.
In cases of defense, 'tis best to weigh
The enemy more mighty than he seems.
So the proportions of defense are filled,
Which of a weak and niggardly projection
Doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scanting
And, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.
The kindred of him hath been fleshed upon us,
And he is bred out of that bloody strain
That haunted us in our familiar paths.
Witness our too-much-memorable shame
When Cressy battle fatally was struck
And all our princes captived by the hand
Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of
Wales,
Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing
Up in the air, crowned with the golden sun,
Saw his heroical seed and smiled to see him
Mangle the work of nature and deface
The patterns that by God and by French fathers
Had twenty years been made. This is a stem
Of that victorious stock, and let us fear
The native mightiness and fate of him.
Ambassadors from Harry King of England
Do crave admittance to your Majesty.
We'll give them present audience. Go, and bring
You see this chase is hotly followed, friends.
Turn head and stop pursuit, for coward dogs
Most spend their mouths when what they seem to
Runs far before them. Good my sovereign,
Take up the English short, and let them know
Of what a monarchy you are the head.
Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin
As self-neglecting.
From him, and thus he greets your Majesty:
He wills you, in the name of God almighty,
That you divest yourself and lay apart
The borrowed glories that, by gift of heaven,
By law of nature and of nations, 'longs
To him and to his heirs--namely, the crown
And all wide-stretched honors that pertain
By custom and the ordinance of times
Unto the crown of France. That you may know
Picked from the wormholes of long-vanished days
Nor from the dust of old oblivion raked,
He sends you this most memorable line,
In every branch truly demonstrative,
Willing you overlook this pedigree,
And when you find him evenly derived
From his most famed of famous ancestors,
Edward the Third, he bids you then resign
Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held
From him, the native and true challenger.
Bloody constraint, for if you hide the crown
Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it.
Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming,
In thunder and in earthquake like a Jove,
That, if requiring fail, he will compel,
And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord,
Deliver up the crown and to take mercy
On the poor souls for whom this hungry war
Opens his vasty jaws, and on your head
Turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries,
The dead men's blood, the prived maidens'
For husbands, fathers, and betrothed lovers
That shall be swallowed in this controversy.
This is his claim, his threat'ning, and my message--
Unless the Dauphin be in presence here,
To whom expressly I bring greeting too.
For us, we will consider of this further.
Tomorrow shall you bear our full intent
Back to our brother of England.
Scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt,
And anything that may not misbecome
The mighty sender, doth he prize you at.
Thus says my king: an if your father's Highness
Do not, in grant of all demands at large,
Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty,
He'll call you to so hot an answer of it
That caves and womby vaultages of France
Shall chide your trespass and return your mock
In second accent of his ordinance.
Say, if my father render fair return,
It is against my will, for I desire
Nothing but odds with England. To that end,
As matching to his youth and vanity,
He'll make your Paris Louvre shake for it,
Were it the mistress court of mighty Europe.
And be assured you'll find a difference,
As we his subjects have in wonder found,
Between the promise of his greener days
And these he masters now. Now he weighs time
Even to the utmost grain. That you shall read
In your own losses, if he stay in France.
Tomorrow shall you know our mind at full.
Dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king
Come here himself to question our delay,
For he is footed in this land already.
You shall be soon dispatched with fair conditions.
To answer matters of this consequence.
Thus with imagined wing our swift scene flies
In motion of no less celerity
Than that of thought. Suppose that you have seen
The well-appointed king at Dover pier
Embark his royalty, and his brave fleet
With silken streamers the young Phoebus
Play with your fancies and in them behold,
Upon the hempen tackle, shipboys climbing.
Hear the shrill whistle, which doth order give
To sounds confused. Behold the threaden sails,
Borne with th' invisible and creeping wind,
Draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea,
Breasting the lofty surge. O, do but think
You stand upon the rivage and behold
For so appears this fleet majestical,
Holding due course to Harfleur. Follow, follow!
Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy,
And leave your England, as dead midnight still,
Guarded with grandsires, babies, and old women,
Either past or not arrived to pith and puissance,
For who is he whose chin is but enriched
With one appearing hair that will not follow
These culled and choice-drawn cavaliers to France?
Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege;
Behold the ordnance on their carriages,
With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur.
Suppose th' Ambassador from the French comes
Tells Harry that the King doth offer him
Katherine his daughter and with her, to dowry,
Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms.
The offer likes not, and the nimble gunner
With linstock now the devilish cannon touches,
And down goes all before them. Still be kind,
And eke out our performance with your mind.
Gloucester. Alarum. Enter Soldiers with scaling
Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once
Or close the wall up with our English dead!
In peace there's nothing so becomes a man
As modest stillness and humility,
But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
Then imitate the action of the tiger:
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
Disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage,
Then lend the eye a terrible aspect,
Let it pry through the portage of the head
Like the brass cannon, let the brow o'erwhelm it
As fearfully as doth a galled rock
Swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean.
Now set the teeth, and stretch the nostril wide,
Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
To his full height. On, on, you noblest English,
Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof,
Fathers that, like so many Alexanders,
Have in these parts from morn till even fought,
And sheathed their swords for lack of argument.
Dishonor not your mothers. Now attest
That those whom you called fathers did beget you.
Be copy now to men of grosser blood
And teach them how to war. And you, good
Whose limbs were made in England, show us here
The mettle of your pasture. Let us swear
That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt
For there is none of you so mean and base
That hath not noble luster in your eyes.
Straining upon the start. The game's afoot.
Follow your spirit, and upon this charge
Cry "God for Harry, England, and Saint George!"
The humor of it is too hot; that is the very plainsong
Knocks go and come. God's vassals drop and die,
Up to the breach, you dogs! Avaunt, you cullions!
Nym and Bardolph are sworn brothers in filching,
By Cheshu, I think he will plow up all if
Irishman, a very valiant gentleman, i' faith.
Jamy, with him.
James.
How yet resolves the Governor of the town?
This is the latest parle we will admit.
Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves
Or, like to men proud of destruction,
Defy us to our worst. For, as I am a soldier,
If I begin the batt'ry once again,
Till in her ashes she lie buried.
The gates of mercy shall be all shut up,
And the fleshed soldier, rough and hard of heart,
In liberty of bloody hand, shall range
With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass
Your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring infants.
What is it then to me if impious war,
Arrayed in flames like to the prince of fiends,
Do with his smirched complexion all fell feats
Enlinked to waste and desolation?
What is 't to me, when you yourselves are cause,
If your pure maidens fall into the hand
Of hot and forcing violation?
What rein can hold licentious wickedness
When down the hill he holds his fierce career?
We may as bootless spend our vain command
Upon th' enraged soldiers in their spoil
As send precepts to the Leviathan
To come ashore. Therefore, you men of Harfleur,
Take pity of your town and of your people
Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command,
Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace
Of heady murder, spoil, and villainy.
If not, why, in a moment look to see
The blind and bloody soldier with foul hand
Desire the locks of your shrill-shrieking daughters,
Your fathers taken by the silver beards
And their most reverend heads dashed to the walls,
Your naked infants spitted upon pikes
Whiles the mad mothers with their howls confused
Do break the clouds, as did the wives of Jewry
At Herod's bloody-hunting slaughtermen.
What say you? Will you yield and this avoid
Or, guilty in defense, be thus destroyed?
Our expectation hath this day an end.
The Dauphin, whom of succors we entreated,
Returns us that his powers are yet not ready
To raise so great a siege. Therefore, great king,
We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy.
Enter our gates, dispose of us and ours,
For we no longer are defensible.
Open your gates.	
Come, uncle Exeter,
Go you and enter Harfleur. There remain,
And fortify it strongly 'gainst the French.
Use mercy to them all for us, dear uncle.
The winter coming on and sickness growing
Upon our soldiers, we will retire to Calais.
Tonight in Harfleur will we be your guest.
Tomorrow for the march are we addressed.
Je pense que je suis le bon ecolier. J'ai gagne deux
Comment appelez-vous "le col"?
Comment appelez-vous "le pied" et "la robe"?
Je ne voudrais prononcer ces mots devant les seigneurs
Brittany, the Constable of France, and others.]
An if he be not fought withal, my lord,
Let us not live in France. Let us quit all,
And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.
The emptying of our fathers' luxury,
Our scions, put in wild and savage stock,
Spurt up so suddenly into the clouds
And overlook their grafters?
Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards!
Mort de ma vie, if they march along
Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom
To buy a slobb'ry and a dirty farm
In that nook-shotten isle of Albion.
Dieu de batailles, where have they this mettle?
Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull,
On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,
Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water,
Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine,
Seem frosty? O, for honor of our land,
Let us not hang like roping icicles
Upon our houses' thatch, whiles a more frosty
Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields!
Our madams mock at us and plainly say
Our mettle is bred out, and they will give
Their bodies to the lust of English youth
To new-store France with bastard warriors.
They bid us to the English dancing-schools,
And teach lavoltas high, and swift corantos,
Saying our grace is only in our heels
And that we are most lofty runaways.
Where is Montjoy the herald? Speed him hence.
Let him greet England with our sharp defiance.
Up, princes, and, with spirit of honor edged
More sharper than your swords, hie to the field:
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;
You Dukes of Orleans, Bourbon, and of Berri,
Alencon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy;
Jacques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont,
Beaumont, Grandpre, Roussi, and Faulconbridge,
Foix, Lestrale, Bouciquault, and Charolois;
High dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and
For your great seats now quit you of great shames.
Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land
With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur.
Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow
Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat
The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon.
Go down upon him--you have power enough--
And in a captive chariot into Rouen
Bring him our prisoner.
Sorry am I his numbers are so few,
His soldiers sick and famished in their march,
For, I am sure, when he shall see our army,
He'll drop his heart into the sink of fear
And for achievement offer us his ransom.
Therefore, Lord Constable, haste on Montjoy,
And let him say to England that we send
To know what willing ransom he will give.--
Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in Rouen.
Not so, I do beseech your Majesty.
Be patient, for you shall remain with us.--
Now forth, Lord Constable and princes all,
And quickly bring us word of England's fall.
Agamemnon, and a man that I love and honor with
Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.
Fortune's furious fickle wheel, that goddess blind,
Exeter hath given the doom of death for pax of little
Hark you, the King is coming, and I must speak
Majesty.
Exeter has very gallantly maintained the pridge.
The French is gone off, look you, and there is gallant
Bardolph, if your Majesty know the man. His face is
England, though we seemed dead, we did but sleep.
Advantage is a better soldier than rashness. Tell him
For our losses, his exchequer is too poor; for th'
What is thy name? I know thy quality.
Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee back,
And tell thy king I do not seek him now
But could be willing to march on to Calais
Without impeachment, for, to say the sooth,
Though 'tis no wisdom to confess so much
Unto an enemy of craft and vantage,
My people are with sickness much enfeebled,
My numbers lessened, and those few I have
Almost no better than so many French,
Who when they were in health, I tell thee, herald,
Did march three Frenchmen. Yet forgive me, God,
That I do brag thus. This your air of France
Hath blown that vice in me. I must repent.
Go therefore, tell thy master: here I am.
My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk,
My army but a weak and sickly guard,
Yet, God before, tell him we will come on
Though France himself and such another neighbor
Stand in our way. There's for thy labor, Montjoy.
Go bid thy master well advise himself:
If we may pass, we will; if we be hindered,
We shall your tawny ground with your red blood
Discolor. And so, Montjoy, fare you well.
The sum of all our answer is but this:
We would not seek a battle as we are,
Nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it.
So tell your master.
We are in God's hand, brother, not in theirs.
March to the bridge. It now draws toward night.
Beyond the river we'll encamp ourselves,
And on tomorrow bid them march away.
Orleans, Dauphin, with others.]
Would it were day!
Ca, ha! He bounds from the earth, as if his
Perseus. He is pure air and fire, and the dull
France.
Would it were day! Alas, poor Harry of England! He
King of England to mope with his fat-brained
It is now two o'clock. But, let me see, by ten
We shall have each a hundred Englishmen.
Now entertain conjecture of a time
When creeping murmur and the poring dark
Fills the wide vessel of the universe.
From camp to camp, through the foul womb of
The hum of either army stilly sounds,
That the fixed sentinels almost receive
The secret whispers of each other's watch.
Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames
Each battle sees the other's umbered face;
Steed threatens steed in high and boastful neighs
Piercing the night's dull ear; and from the tents
The armorers, accomplishing the knights,
With busy hammers closing rivets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation.
The country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll,
And, the third hour of drowsy morning named,
Proud of their numbers and secure in soul,
The confident and overlusty French
Do the low-rated English play at dice
And chide the cripple, tardy-gaited night,
Who like a foul and ugly witch doth limp
So tediously away. The poor condemned English,
Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires
Sit patiently and inly ruminate
The morning's danger; and their gesture sad,
Investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats,
Presenteth them unto the gazing moon
So many horrid ghosts. O now, who will behold
The royal captain of this ruined band
Walking from watch to watch, from tent to tent,
Let him cry, "Praise and glory on his head!"
For forth he goes and visits all his host,
Bids them good morrow with a modest smile,
And calls them brothers, friends, and countrymen.
Upon his royal face there is no note
How dread an army hath enrounded him,
Nor doth he dedicate one jot of color
Unto the weary and all-watched night,
But freshly looks and overbears attaint
With cheerful semblance and sweet majesty,
That every wretch, pining and pale before,
Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks.
His liberal eye doth give to everyone,
Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all
Behold, as may unworthiness define,
And so our scene must to the battle fly,
Where, O for pity, we shall much disgrace,
With four or five most vile and ragged foils
Right ill-disposed in brawl ridiculous,
The name of Agincourt. Yet sit and see,
Minding true things by what their mock'ries be.
Gloucester, 'tis true that we are in great danger.
The greater therefore should our courage be.--
Good morrow, brother Bedford. God almighty,
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distill it out.
For our bad neighbor makes us early stirrers,
Which is both healthful and good husbandry.
Besides, they are our outward consciences
And preachers to us all, admonishing
That we should dress us fairly for our end.
Thus may we gather honey from the weed
And make a moral of the devil himself.
Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham.
Were better than a churlish turf of France.
Not so, my liege, this lodging likes me better,
Since I may say "Now lie I like a king."
Upon example. So the spirit is eased;
And when the mind is quickened, out of doubt,
The organs, though defunct and dead before,
Break up their drowsy grave and newly move
With casted slough and fresh legerity.
Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas.
Brothers both,
Commend me to the princes in our camp,
Do my good morrow to them, and anon
Desire them all to my pavilion.
Go with my brothers to my lords of England.
And then I would no other company.
The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry.
God-a-mercy, old heart, thou speak'st cheerfully.
Saint Davy's day.
It is the greatest admiration in the universal world
Great, you shall find, I warrant you, that there is
Though it appear a little out of fashion,
There is much care and valor in this Welshman.
Michael Williams.]
If his cause be wrong, our obedience to the
King wipes the crime of it out of us.
Or if a servant, under his master's command transporting
Some, peradventure, have on them the guilt of
War is His beadle, war is His vengeance, so that here
Therefore should every soldier in the wars do as
God so free an offer, He let him outlive that day to
King's company.
French crowns to one they will beat us, for they
King himself will be a clipper.
Upon the King! Let us our lives, our souls, our
We must bear all. O hard condition,
Twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath
Of every fool whose sense no more can feel
But his own wringing. What infinite heart's ease
Must kings neglect that private men enjoy?
And what have kings that privates have not too,
Save ceremony, save general ceremony?
And what art thou, thou idol ceremony?
What kind of god art thou that suffer'st more
Of mortal griefs than do thy worshipers?
What are thy rents? What are thy comings-in?
What is thy soul of adoration?
Art thou aught else but place, degree, and form,
Creating awe and fear in other men,
Wherein thou art less happy, being feared,
Than they in fearing?
What drink'st thou oft, instead of homage sweet,
But poisoned flattery? O, be sick, great greatness,
And bid thy ceremony give thee cure!
Think'st thou the fiery fever will go out
With titles blown from adulation?
Will it give place to flexure and low bending?
Canst thou, when thou command'st the beggar's
Command the health of it? No, thou proud dream,
That play'st so subtly with a king's repose.
The sword, the mace, the crown imperial,
The intertissued robe of gold and pearl,
The farced title running 'fore the King,
The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp
That beats upon the high shore of this world;
No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous ceremony,
Not all these, laid in bed majestical,
Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave
Who, with a body filled and vacant mind,
Gets him to rest, crammed with distressful bread;
Never sees horrid night, the child of hell,
But, like a lackey, from the rise to set
Sweats in the eye of Phoebus, and all night
Sleeps in Elysium; next day after dawn
Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse,
And follows so the ever-running year
With profitable labor to his grave.
And, but for ceremony, such a wretch,
Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep,
Had the forehand and vantage of a king.
The slave, a member of the country's peace,
Enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots
What watch the King keeps to maintain the peace,
Whose hours the peasant best advantages.
My lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence,
Seek through your camp to find you.
Collect them all together at my tent.
Possess them not with fear. Take from them now
The sense of reck'ning or th' opposed numbers
Pluck their hearts from them. Not today, O Lord,
My father made in compassing the crown.
And on it have bestowed more contrite tears
Than from it issued forced drops of blood.
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay
Who twice a day their withered hands hold up
Toward heaven to pardon blood. And I have built
Two chantries where the sad and solemn priests
Sing still for Richard's soul. More will I do--
Though all that I can do is nothing worth,
Since that my penitence comes after all,
Imploring pardon.
The day, my friends, and all things stay for me.
The sun doth gild our armor. Up, my lords.
Montez a cheval! My horse, varlet! Lackey! Ha!
Now, my Lord Constable?
Hark how our steeds for present service neigh.
Mount them, and make incision in their hides,
That their hot blood may spin in English eyes
And dout them with superfluous courage. Ha!
What, will you have them weep our horses' blood?
How shall we then behold their natural tears?
The English are embattled, you French peers.
To horse, you gallant princes, straight to horse.
Do but behold yond poor and starved band,
And your fair show shall suck away their souls,
Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
There is not work enough for all our hands,
Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins
To give each naked curtal ax a stain,
That our French gallants shall today draw out
And sheathe for lack of sport. Let us but blow on
The vapor of our valor will o'erturn them.
That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants,
Who in unnecessary action swarm
About our squares of battle, were enough
To purge this field of such a hilding foe,
Though we upon this mountain's basis by
Took stand for idle speculation,
But that our honors must not. What's to say?
And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound
The tucket sonance and the note to mount,
For our approach shall so much dare the field
That England shall couch down in fear and yield.
Why do you stay so long, my lords of France?
Yond island carrions, desperate of their bones,
Ill-favoredly become the morning field.
Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose,
And our air shakes them passing scornfully.
Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggared host
And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps.
The horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks
With torch staves in their hand, and their poor jades
Lob down their heads, drooping the hides and hips,
The gum down-roping from their pale dead eyes,
And in their pale dull mouths the gemeled bit
Lies foul with chawed grass, still and motionless.
And their executors, the knavish crows,
Fly o'er them all, impatient for their hour.
Description cannot suit itself in words
To demonstrate the life of such a battle
In life so lifeless, as it shows itself.
They have said their prayers, and they stay for death.
Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits,
And give their fasting horses provender,
And after fight with them?
And use it for my haste. Come, come away.
The sun is high, and we outwear the day.
The King himself is rode to view their battle.
Of fighting men they have full threescore thousand.
There's five to one. Besides, they all are fresh.
God's arm strike with us! 'Tis a fearful odds.
God be wi' you, princes all. I'll to my charge.
If we no more meet till we meet in heaven,
Then joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford,
My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,
And my kind kinsman, warriors all, adieu.
Farewell, good Salisbury, and good luck go with
And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it,
For thou art framed of the firm truth of valor.
Farewell, kind lord. Fight valiantly today.
He is as full of valor as of kindness,
Princely in both.
But one ten thousand of those men in England
That do no work today.
My cousin Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin.
If we are marked to die, we are enough
To do our country loss; and if to live,
The fewer men, the greater share of honor.
God's will, I pray thee wish not one man more.
By Jove, I am not covetous for gold,
Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost;
It yearns me not if men my garments wear;
Such outward things dwell not in my desires.
But if it be a sin to covet honor,
No, 'faith, my coz, wish not a man from England.
God's peace, I would not lose so great an honor
As one man more, methinks, would share from me,
For the best hope I have. O, do not wish one more!
Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through my host,
That he which hath no stomach to this fight,
Let him depart. His passport shall be made,
And crowns for convoy put into his purse.
We would not die in that man's company
That fears his fellowship to die with us.
This day is called the feast of Crispian.
He that outlives this day and comes safe home
Will stand o' tiptoe when this day is named
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
He that shall see this day, and live old age,
Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbors
And say "Tomorrow is Saint Crispian."
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars.
Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot,
But he'll remember with advantages
What feats he did that day. Then shall our names,
Familiar in his mouth as household words,
Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Be in their flowing cups freshly remembered.
This story shall the good man teach his son,
And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by,
From this day to the ending of the world,
But we in it shall be remembered--
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
For he today that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition;
And gentlemen in England now abed
Shall think themselves accursed they were not here,
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin's day.
My sovereign lord, bestow yourself with speed.
The French are bravely in their battles set,
And will with all expedience charge on us.
All things are ready if our minds be so.
Perish the man whose mind is backward now!
Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?
God's will, my liege, would you and I alone,
Without more help, could fight this royal battle!
Why, now thou hast unwished five thousand men,
Which likes me better than to wish us one.--
You know your places. God be with you all.
Once more I come to know of thee, King Harry,
If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound,
Before thy most assured overthrow.
For certainly thou art so near the gulf
Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy,
The Constable desires thee thou wilt mind
Thy followers of repentance, that their souls
May make a peaceful and a sweet retire
From off these fields where, wretches, their poor
Must lie and fester.
Bid them achieve me and then sell my bones.
Good God, why should they mock poor fellows
The man that once did sell the lion's skin
While the beast lived was killed with hunting him.
Find native graves, upon the which, I trust,
Shall witness live in brass of this day's work.
And those that leave their valiant bones in France,
Dying like men, though buried in your dunghills,
They shall be famed; for there the sun shall greet
And draw their honors reeking up to heaven,
Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,
The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France.
Mark, then, abounding valor in our English,
That being dead, like to the bullet's crazing,
Break out into a second course of mischief,
Killing in relapse of mortality.
Let me speak proudly: tell the Constable
We are but warriors for the working day;
Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirched
With rainy marching in the painful field.
There's not a piece of feather in our host--
Good argument, I hope, we will not fly--
And time hath worn us into slovenry.
But, by the Mass, our hearts are in the trim,
And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night
They'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
The gay new coats o'er the French soldiers' heads
And turn them out of service. If they do this,
As, if God please, they shall, my ransom then
Will soon be levied. Herald, save thou thy labor.
Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald.
They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints,
Which, if they have, as I will leave 'em them,
Shall yield them little, tell the Constable.
Thou never shalt hear herald anymore.
My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg
The leading of the vaward.
Take it, brave York.	
Now, soldiers, march away,
And how Thou pleasest, God, dispose the day.
What is thy name? Discuss.
Seigneur Dew, thou diest on point of fox, except, O
Seigneur, thou do give to me egregious ransom.
Come hither, boy. Ask me this slave in French what
Dieu, me pardonner. Je suis le gentilhomme de bonne
England.
Follow me.
Rambures.]
Mort de ma vie, all is confounded, all!
Reproach and everlasting shame
Sits mocking in our plumes.	
Do not run away.
Be these the wretches that we played at dice for?
Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?
Shame, and eternal shame, nothing but shame!
Let us die. In once more! Back again!
And he that will not follow Bourbon now,
Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand
Like a base pander hold the chamber door,
Whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog,
His fairest daughter is contaminate.
Disorder, that hath spoiled us, friend us now.
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.
We are enough yet living in the field
To smother up the English in our throngs,
If any order might be thought upon.
The devil take order now! I'll to the throng.
Let life be short, else shame will be too long.
Well have we done, thrice-valiant countrymen,
But all's not done. Yet keep the French the field.
The Duke of York commends him to your Majesty.
Lives he, good uncle? Thrice within this hour
From helmet to the spur, all blood he was.
In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie,
Larding the plain, and by his bloody side,
Yoke-fellow to his honor-owing wounds,
The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.
Suffolk first died, and York, all haggled over,
Comes to him where in gore he lay insteeped,
And takes him by the beard, kisses the gashes
That bloodily did yawn upon his face.
He cries aloud "Tarry, my cousin Suffolk.
My soul shall thine keep company to heaven.
Tarry, sweet soul, for mine; then fly abreast,
As in this glorious and well-foughten field
We kept together in our chivalry."
Upon these words I came and cheered him up.
He smiled me in the face, raught me his hand,
And with a feeble grip, says "Dear my lord,
Commend my service to my sovereign."
So did he turn, and over Suffolk's neck
He threw his wounded arm and kissed his lips,
And so, espoused to death, with blood he sealed
The pretty and sweet manner of it forced
Those waters from me which I would have stopped,
But I had not so much of man in me,
And all my mother came into mine eyes
And gave me up to tears.
For, hearing this, I must perforce compound
With my full eyes, or they will issue too.	
But hark, what new alarum is this same?
The French have reinforced their scattered men.
Then every soldier kill his prisoners.
Give the word through.
Gower. What call you the town's name where
Alexander the Pig was born?
His father was called Philip of Macedon, as I
Macedon, and there is also, moreover, a river at
Monmouth. It is called Wye at Monmouth, but it is
But 'tis all one; 'tis alike as my fingers is to my
Alexander's life well, Harry of Monmouth's life is
Heralds and Bourbon with other prisoners. Flourish.]
Until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald.
Ride thou unto the horsemen on yond hill.
If they will fight with us, bid them come down,
Or void the field. They do offend our sight.
If they'll do neither, we will come to them
And make them skirr away as swift as stones
Enforced from the old Assyrian slings.
Besides, we'll cut the throats of those we have,
And not a man of them that we shall take
Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.
Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.
His eyes are humbler than they used to be.
How now, what means this, herald? Know'st thou
That I have fined these bones of mine for ransom?
Com'st thou again for ransom?
That we may wander o'er this bloody field
To book our dead and then to bury them,
To sort our nobles from our common men,
For many of our princes--woe the while!--
Lie drowned and soaked in mercenary blood.
So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs
In blood of princes, and the wounded steeds
Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage
Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters,
Killing them twice. O, give us leave, great king,
To view the field in safety and dispose
Of their dead bodies.
For yet a many of your horsemen peer
And gallop o'er the field.
Praised be God, and not our strength, for it!
What is this castle called that stands hard by?
Then call we this the field of Agincourt,
Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.
France.
For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman.
Majesty's Welsh plood out of your pody, I can tell
God keep me so.--Our heralds, go with him.
Bring me just notice of the numbers dead
On both our parts.
Call yonder fellow hither.
Fluellen, wear thou this favor for me, and stick it in
My Lord of Warwick and my brother Gloucester,
Follow Fluellen closely at the heels.
The glove which I have given him for a favor
May haply purchase him a box o' th' ear.
It is the soldier's. I by bargain should
Wear it myself. Follow, good cousin Warwick.
If that the soldier strike him, as I judge
By his blunt bearing he will keep his word,
Some sudden mischief may arise of it,
For I do know Fluellen valiant
And, touched with choler, hot as gunpowder,
And quickly will return an injury.
Follow, and see there be no harm between them.--
Go you with me, uncle of Exeter.
King. There is more good toward you peradventure
God for it, a most contagious treason come to
Here is his Majesty.
Majesty is take out of the helmet of Alencon.
Look, here is the fellow of it.
And thou hast given me most bitter terms.
Never came any from mine that might offend your
Majesty.
Therefore, I beseech your Highness pardon me.
Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with crowns
And give it to this fellow.--Keep it, fellow,
And wear it for an honor in thy cap
Till I do challenge it.--Give him the crowns.--
And, captain, you must needs be friends with him.
Here is the number of the slaughtered French.
What prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?
Charles, Duke of Orleans, nephew to the King;
John, Duke of Bourbon, and Lord Bouciqualt.
Of other lords and barons, knights and squires,
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.
This note doth tell me of ten thousand French
That in the field lie slain. Of princes in this number
And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead
One hundred twenty-six. Added to these,
Of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen,
Eight thousand and four hundred, of the which
Five hundred were but yesterday dubbed knights.
So that in these ten thousand they have lost,
There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries.
The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires,
And gentlemen of blood and quality.
The names of those their nobles that lie dead:
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;
Jacques of Chatillon, Admiral of France;
The Master of the Crossbows, Lord Rambures;
Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard
Dauphin;
John, Duke of Alencon; Anthony, Duke of Brabant,
The brother to the Duke of Burgundy;
And Edward, Duke of Bar. Of lusty earls:
Grandpre and Roussi, Faulconbridge and Foix,
Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrale.
Here was a royal fellowship of death.
Where is the number of our English dead?
Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,
Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire;
None else of name, and of all other men
But five and twenty. O God, thy arm was here,
And not to us, but to thy arm alone
Ascribe we all! When, without stratagem,
But in plain shock and even play of battle,
Was ever known so great and little loss
On one part and on th' other? Take it, God,
For it is none but thine.
Come, go we in procession to the village,
And be it death proclaimed through our host
To boast of this or take that praise from God
Which is His only.
Yes, captain, but with this acknowledgment:
That God fought for us.
Let there be sung Non nobis, and Te Deum,
The dead with charity enclosed in clay,
And then to Calais, and to England then,
Where ne'er from France arrived more happy men.
Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story
That I may prompt them; and of such as have,
Of time, of numbers, and due course of things,
Which cannot in their huge and proper life
Be here presented. Now we bear the King
Toward Calais. Grant him there. There seen,
Heave him away upon your winged thoughts
Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach
Pales in the flood with men, wives, and boys,
Whose shouts and claps outvoice the deep-mouthed
Which, like a mighty whiffler 'fore the King
Seems to prepare his way. So let him land,
And solemnly see him set on to London.
So swift a pace hath thought that even now
You may imagine him upon Blackheath,
Where that his lords desire him to have borne
His bruised helmet and his bended sword
Before him through the city. He forbids it,
Being free from vainness and self-glorious pride,
Giving full trophy, signal, and ostent
Quite from himself, to God. But now behold,
In the quick forge and workinghouse of thought,
How London doth pour out her citizens.
The Mayor and all his brethren in best sort,
Like to the senators of th' antique Rome,
With the plebeians swarming at their heels,
Go forth and fetch their conqu'ring Caesar in--
As, by a lower but by loving likelihood
Were now the general of our gracious empress,
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
Bringing rebellion broached on his sword,
How many would the peaceful city quit
To welcome him! Much more, and much more
Did they this Harry. Now in London place him
Invites the King of England's stay at home;
The Emperor's coming in behalf of France
To order peace between them) and omit
All the occurrences, whatever chanced,
Till Harry's back return again to France.
There must we bring him, and myself have played
The interim, by remembering you 'tis past.
Then brook abridgment, and your eyes advance
After your thoughts, straight back again to France.
Trojan, to have me fold up Parca's fatal web? Hence.
Nay, pray you throw none away. The skin is good for
Will you mock at an ancient tradition begun upon
English in the native garb, he could not therefore
English condition. Fare you well.	
News have I that my Doll is dead i' th' spital of a
And patches will I get unto these cudgeled scars,
And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.
Warwick, Westmoreland, and other Lords. At another,
Queen Isabel of France, the King of France, the
Princess Katherine and Alice, the Duke of Burgundy,
Peace to this meeting wherefor we are met.
Unto our brother France and to our sister,
Health and fair time of day.--Joy and good wishes
To our most fair and princely cousin Katherine.--
And, as a branch and member of this royalty,
By whom this great assembly is contrived,
We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy.--
And princes French, and peers, health to you all.
Right joyous are we to behold your face,
Most worthy brother England. Fairly met.--
So are you, princes English, every one.
So happy be the issue, brother Ireland,
Of this good day and of this gracious meeting,
As we are now glad to behold your eyes--
Your eyes which hitherto have borne in them
Against the French that met them in their bent
The fatal balls of murdering basilisks.
The venom of such looks, we fairly hope,
Have lost their quality, and that this day
Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.
To cry "Amen" to that, thus we appear.
You English princes all, I do salute you.
My duty to you both, on equal love,
Great kings of France and England. That I have
With all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavors
To bring your most imperial Majesties
Unto this bar and royal interview,
Your Mightiness on both parts best can witness.
Since, then, my office hath so far prevailed
That face to face and royal eye to eye
You have congreeted, let it not disgrace me
If I demand before this royal view
What rub or what impediment there is
Why that the naked, poor, and mangled peace,
Dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births,
Should not in this best garden of the world,
Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage?
Alas, she hath from France too long been chased,
And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps,
Corrupting in its own fertility.
Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart,
Unpruned, dies. Her hedges, even-pleached,
Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair,
Put forth disordered twigs. Her fallow leas
The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory
Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts
That should deracinate such savagery.
The even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth
The freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover,
Wanting the scythe, withal uncorrected, rank,
Conceives by idleness, and nothing teems
But hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burrs,
Losing both beauty and utility.
And all our vineyards, fallows, meads, and hedges,
Defective in their natures, grow to wildness.
Even so our houses and ourselves and children
Have lost, or do not learn for want of time,
The sciences that should become our country,
But grow like savages, as soldiers will
That nothing do but meditate on blood,
To swearing and stern looks, diffused attire,
And everything that seems unnatural.
Which to reduce into our former favor
You are assembled, and my speech entreats
That I may know the let why gentle peace
Should not expel these inconveniences
And bless us with her former qualities.
If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the peace,
Whose want gives growth to th' imperfections
Which you have cited, you must buy that peace
With full accord to all our just demands,
Whose tenors and particular effects
You have, enscheduled briefly, in your hands.
The King hath heard them, to the which as yet
There is no answer made.
Well then, the peace which you before so urged
Lies in his answer.
To appoint some of your council presently
To sit with us once more with better heed
To resurvey them, we will suddenly
Pass our accept and peremptory answer.
Brother, we shall.--Go, uncle Exeter,
And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester,
Warwick, and Huntington, go with the King,
And take with you free power to ratify,
Augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best
Shall see advantageable for our dignity,
Anything in or out of our demands,
And we'll consign thereto.--Will you, fair sister,
Go with the princes or stay here with us?
Our gracious brother, I will go with them.
Haply a woman's voice may do some good
When articles too nicely urged be stood on.
Yet leave our cousin Katherine here with us.
She is our capital demand, comprised
Within the forerank of our articles.
She hath good leave.
Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms
Such as will enter at a lady's ear
And plead his love-suit to her gentle heart?
Then if you urge me farther than to say "Do you, in
For the one, I have neither words nor measure; and
Kate, I cannot look greenly nor gasp out my eloquence,
France?
France, et quand vous avez le possession de moi--let
French, unless it be to laugh at me.
Shall we not? What say'st thou, my fair flower de
My comfort is that old age, that ill layer-up of
Plantagenet is thine," who, though I speak it before
France--I cannot tell wat is baiser en Anglish.
Here comes your father.
Can you blame her, then, being a maid yet rosed
Bartholomew-tide: blind, though they have their
French city for one fair French maid that stands in
We have consented to all terms of reason.
The King hath granted every article,
His daughter first, and, in sequel, all,
According to their firm proposed natures.
Only he hath not yet subscribed this:
Where your Majesty demands that the King of
France, having any occasion to write for matter of
Henri, roi d' Angleterre, heritier de France; and thus
Angliae et hoeres Franciae.
Nor this I have not, brother, so denied
But your request shall make me let it pass.
Let that one article rank with the rest,
And thereupon give me your daughter.
Take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up
Issue to me, that the contending kingdoms
Of France and England, whose very shores look pale
With envy of each other's happiness,
May cease their hatred, and this dear conjunction
Plant neighborhood and Christian-like accord
In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance
His bleeding sword 'twixt England and fair France.
Now welcome, Kate, and bear me witness all
That here I kiss her as my sovereign queen.
God, the best maker of all marriages,
Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one.
As man and wife, being two, are one in love,
So be there 'twixt your kingdoms such a spousal
That never may ill office or fell jealousy,
Which troubles oft the bed of blessed marriage,
Thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms
To make divorce of their incorporate league,
That English may as French, French Englishmen,
Receive each other. God speak this Amen!
Prepare we for our marriage; on which day,
My Lord of Burgundy, we'll take your oath,
And all the peers', for surety of our leagues.
Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me,
And may our oaths well kept and prosp'rous be.
Thus far with rough and all-unable pen
Our bending author hath pursued the story,
In little room confining mighty men,
Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.
Small time, but in that small most greatly lived
This star of England. Fortune made his sword,
By which the world's best garden he achieved
And of it left his son imperial lord.
Henry the Sixth, in infant bands crowned King
Of France and England, did this king succeed,
Whose state so many had the managing
That they lost France and made his England bleed,
Which oft our stage hath shown. And for their sake,
In your fair minds let this acceptance take.
So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
To be commenced in strands afar remote.
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood.
No more shall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruise her flow'rets with the armed hoofs
Of hostile paces. Those opposed eyes,
Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
All of one nature, of one substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock
And furious close of civil butchery,
Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,
March all one way and be no more opposed
Against acquaintance, kindred, and allies.
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,
As far as to the sepulcher of Christ--
Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight--
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
Whose arms were molded in their mothers' womb
To chase these pagans in those holy fields
Over whose acres walked those blessed feet
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed
For our advantage on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go.
Therefor we meet not now. Then let me hear
Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,
What yesternight our council did decree
In forwarding this dear expedience.
My liege, this haste was hot in question,
And many limits of the charge set down
But yesternight, when all athwart there came
Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
Such beastly shameless transformation
By those Welshwomen done, as may not be
Without much shame retold or spoken of.
It seems then that the tidings of this broil
Brake off our business for the Holy Land.
This matched with other did, my gracious lord.
For more uneven and unwelcome news
Came from the north, and thus it did import:
On Holy-rood Day the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald,
That ever valiant and approved Scot,
At Holmedon met, where they did spend
As by discharge of their artillery
And shape of likelihood the news was told,
For he that brought them, in the very heat
And pride of their contention did take horse,
Uncertain of the issue any way.
Here is a dear, a true-industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse,
Stained with the variation of each soil
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours,
And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited;
Ten thousand bold Scots, two-and-twenty knights,
Balked in their own blood, did Sir Walter see
On Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners Hotspur took
Mordake, Earl of Fife and eldest son
To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Atholl,
Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith.
And is not this an honorable spoil?
In faith, it is a conquest for a prince to boast of.
Yea, there thou mak'st me sad, and mak'st me sin
In envy that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the father to so blest a son,
Amongst a grove the very straightest plant,
Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride;
Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
See riot and dishonor stain the brow
Of my young Harry. O, that it could be proved
That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged
In cradle-clothes our children where they lay,
And called mine "Percy," his "Plantagenet"!
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.
But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,
Of this young Percy's pride? The prisoners
Which he in this adventure hath surprised
To his own use he keeps, and sends me word
This is his uncle's teaching. This is Worcester,
Malevolent to you in all aspects,
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
The crest of youth against your dignity.
But I have sent for him to answer this.
And for this cause awhile we must neglect
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we
Will hold at Windsor. So inform the lords.
But come yourself with speed to us again,
For more is to be said and to be done
Than out of anger can be uttered.
And is not a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of
England when thou art king? And resolution thus
Before I knew thee, Hal, I knew nothing, and now
Christendom.
An I do not, call me villain and baffle me.
Poins!--Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a
Remorse? What says Sir John Sack-and-Sugar?
Jack, how agrees the devil and thee about
There I'll sup. Farewell.
The unyoked humor of your idleness.
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his beauty from the world,
That, when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted, he may be more wondered at
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
Of vapors that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holidays,
To sport would be as tedious as to work,
But when they seldom come, they wished-for come,
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.
So when this loose behavior I throw off
And pay the debt I never promised,
By how much better than my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes;
And, like bright metal on a sullen ground,
My reformation, glitt'ring o'er my fault,
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
Than that which hath no foil to set it off.
Redeeming time when men think least I will.
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these indignities,
And you have found me, for accordingly
You tread upon my patience. But be sure
Mighty and to be feared, than my condition,
Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,
And therefore lost that title of respect
Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.
Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves
The scourge of greatness to be used on it,
And that same greatness too which our own hands
Have holp to make so portly.
Worcester, get thee gone, for I do see
Danger and disobedience in thine eye.
And majesty might never yet endure
The moody frontier of a servant brow.
You have good leave to leave us. When we need
Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.
You were about to speak.
Those prisoners in your Highness' name demanded,
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were, as he says, not with such strength denied
As is delivered to your Majesty.
Either envy, therefore, or misprision
Is guilty of this fault, and not my son.
My liege, I did deny no prisoners.
But I remember, when the fight was done,
When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,
Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,
Came there a certain lord, neat and trimly dressed,
Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reaped
Showed like a stubble land at harvest home.
He was perfumed like a milliner,
And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held
He gave his nose and took 't away again,
Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
Took it in snuff; and still he smiled and talked.
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
He called them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse
Betwixt the wind and his nobility.
With many holiday and lady terms
He questioned me, amongst the rest demanded
My prisoners in your Majesty's behalf.
To be so pestered with a popinjay,
Out of my grief and my impatience
Answered neglectingly I know not what--
He should, or he should not; for he made me mad
To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet
And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman
Of guns, and drums, and wounds--God save the
And telling me the sovereignest thing on Earth
Was parmacety for an inward bruise,
And that it was great pity, so it was,
This villainous saltpeter should be digged
Out of the bowels of the harmless Earth,
Which many a good tall fellow had destroyed
So cowardly, and but for these vile guns
He would himself have been a soldier.
This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,
And I beseech you, let not his report
Come current for an accusation
Betwixt my love and your high Majesty.
The circumstance considered, good my lord,
Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said
To such a person and in such a place,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
May reasonably die and never rise
To do him wrong or any way impeach
What then he said, so he unsay it now.
Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners,
But with proviso and exception
That we at our own charge shall ransom straight
His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer,
Who, on my soul, hath willfully betrayed
The lives of those that he did lead to fight
Against that great magician, damned Glendower,
Whose daughter, as we hear, that Earl of March
Hath lately married. Shall our coffers then
Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?
Shall we buy treason and indent with fears
When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
No, on the barren mountains let him starve,
For I shall never hold that man my friend
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
To ransom home revolted Mortimer.
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,
But by the chance of war. To prove that true
Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds,
Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took
When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank
In single opposition hand to hand
He did confound the best part of an hour
In changing hardiment with great Glendower.
Three times they breathed, and three times did they
Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood,
Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds
And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,
Blood-stained with these valiant combatants.
Never did bare and rotten policy
Color her working with such deadly wounds,
Nor never could the noble Mortimer
Receive so many, and all willingly.
Then let not him be slandered with revolt.
Thou dost belie him, Percy; thou dost belie him.
He never did encounter with Glendower.
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer.
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease you.--My lord Northumberland,
We license your departure with your son.--
Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.
An if the devil come and roar for them,
And tell him so, for I will ease my heart,
Albeit I make a hazard of my head.
What, drunk with choler? Stay and pause awhile.
Here comes your uncle.
Zounds, I will speak of him, and let my soul
Want mercy if I do not join with him.
Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins
And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,
But I will lift the downtrod Mortimer
As high in the air as this unthankful king,
As this ingrate and cankered Bolingbroke.
Brother, the King hath made your nephew mad.
Who struck this heat up after I was gone?
He will forsooth have all my prisoners,
And when I urged the ransom once again
Of my wife's brother, then his cheek looked pale,
And on my face he turned an eye of death,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.
By Richard, that dead is, the next of blood?
He was; I heard the proclamation.
And then it was when the unhappy king--
Whose wrongs in us God pardon!--did set forth
Upon his Irish expedition;
From whence he, intercepted, did return
To be deposed and shortly murdered.
And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth
Live scandalized and foully spoken of.
But soft, I pray you. Did King Richard then
Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
Heir to the crown?
Nay then, I cannot blame his cousin king
That wished him on the barren mountains starve.
But shall it be that you that set the crown
Upon the head of this forgetful man
And for his sake wear the detested blot
Of murderous subornation--shall it be
That you a world of curses undergo,
Being the agents or base second means,
The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?
To show the line and the predicament
Wherein you range under this subtle king.
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
Or fill up chronicles in time to come,
That men of your nobility and power
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,
And plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken
That you are fooled, discarded, and shook off
By him for whom these shames you underwent?
No, yet time serves wherein you may redeem
Your banished honors and restore yourselves
Into the good thoughts of the world again,
Revenge the jeering and disdained contempt
Of this proud king, who studies day and night
To answer all the debt he owes to you
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths.
Therefore I say--
And now I will unclasp a secret book,
And to your quick-conceiving discontents
As full of peril and adventurous spirit
As to o'erwalk a current roaring loud
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.
If he fall in, good night, or sink or swim!
Send danger from the east unto the west,
So honor cross it from the north to south,
And let them grapple. O, the blood more stirs
To rouse a lion than to start a hare!
Imagination of some great exploit
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap
To pluck bright honor from the pale-faced moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fathom line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honor by the locks,
So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
Without corrival all her dignities.
But out upon this half-faced fellowship!
He apprehends a world of figures here,
But not the form of what he should attend.--
Good cousin, give me audience for a while.
That are your prisoners--
By God, he shall not have a Scot of them.
No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not.
And lend no ear unto my purposes:
Those prisoners you shall keep--
He said he would not ransom Mortimer,
Forbade my tongue to speak of Mortimer.
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
And in his ear I'll hollo "Mortimer."
Nay, I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak
Nothing but "Mortimer," and give it him
To keep his anger still in motion.
All studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke.
And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales--
But that I think his father loves him not
And would be glad he met with some mischance--
Farewell, kinsman. I'll talk to you
When you are better tempered to attend.
Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool
Art thou to break into this woman's mood,
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!
Why, look you, I am whipped and scourged with
Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear
Of this vile politician, Bolingbroke.
In Richard's time--what do you call the place?
His uncle York, where I first bowed my knee
Unto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke.
Ravenspurgh.
Why, what a candy deal of courtesy
This fawning greyhound then did proffer me:
And "gentle Harry Percy," and "kind cousin."
Good uncle, tell your tale. I have done.
Nay, if you have not, to it again.
We will stay your leisure.
Then once more to your Scottish prisoners:
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
And make the Douglas' son your only mean
For powers in Scotland, which, for divers reasons
Which I shall send you written, be assured
Will easily be granted.--You, my lord,
Your son in Scotland being thus employed,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Of that same noble prelate well beloved,
The Archbishop.
His brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop.
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted, and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on.
Before the game is afoot thou still let'st slip.
Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot.
And then the power of Scotland and of York
To join with Mortimer, ha?
In faith, it is exceedingly well aimed.
And 'tis no little reason bids us speed
To save our heads by raising of a head,
For bear ourselves as even as we can,
The King will always think him in our debt,
And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,
Till he hath found a time to pay us home.
And see already how he doth begin
To make us strangers to his looks of love.
He does, he does. We'll be revenged on him.
Cousin, farewell. No further go in this
Than I by letters shall direct your course.
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
Where you and Douglas and our powers at once,
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.
Farewell, good brother. We shall thrive, I trust.
Uncle, adieu. O, let the hours be short
Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport.
Cross.
Hast thou never an eye in thy head? Canst not hear?
An 'twere not as good deed as drink to break the
Chamberlain," for thou variest no more from
Nicholas as truly as a man of falsehood may.
Will she hold out water in foul way?
We steal as in a castle, cocksure. We have the
Bid the ostler bring my gelding out of the stable.
Farewell, you muddy knave.
The rascal hath removed my horse and tied him I
Hal! A plague upon you both.--Bardolph! Peto!--
Give me my horse, you rogues. Give me my horse
What a plague mean you to colt me
There's money of the King's coming down the hill.
Tavern.
When thou need'st him, there thou shalt find him.
Farewell and stand fast.
Fleece them!
No, you fat chuffs. I would your store were
London, it would be argument for a week, laughter
There's no more valor in that Poins than in a wild
Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse.
The thieves are all scattered, and possessed with
So strongly that they dare not meet each other.
Each takes his fellow for an officer.
Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death,
And lards the lean earth as he walks along.
Were 't not for laughing, I should pity him.
Why, that's certain. 'Tis dangerous to take a cold,
The purpose you undertake is dangerous, the friends
Zounds, an I were now by this rascal, I could brain
Lord of York, and Owen Glendower? Is there not
What a pagan rascal is this--an infidel! Ha, you
King. We are prepared. I will set forward tonight.
How now, Kate? I must leave you within these two
For what offense have I this fortnight been
Tell me, sweet lord, what is 't that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep?
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth
And start so often when thou sit'st alone?
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks
And given my treasures and my rights of thee
To thick-eyed musing and curst melancholy?
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watched,
And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars,
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,
Cry "Courage! To the field!" And thou hast talked
Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents,
Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,
Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin,
Of prisoners' ransom, and of soldiers slain,
And all the currents of a heady fight.
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war,
And thus hath so bestirred thee in thy sleep,
That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream,
And in thy face strange motions have appeared,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath
On some great sudden hest. O, what portents are
Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,
And I must know it, else he loves me not.
What, ho!
Is Gilliams with the packet gone?
Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
One horse, my lord, he brought even now.
What horse? A roan, a crop-ear, is it not?
It is, my lord.
Well, I will back him straight. O, Esperance!
Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.
As you are tossed with. In faith,
About his title, and hath sent for you
To line his enterprise; but if you go--
So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.
Come, come, you paraquito, answer me
Directly unto this question that I ask.
In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry,
An if thou wilt not tell me all things true.
Away, you trifler. Love, I love thee not.
To play with mammets and to tilt with lips.
We must have bloody noses and cracked crowns,
And pass them current too.--Gods me, my horse!--
What say'st thou, Kate? What wouldst thou have
Do you not love me? Do you not indeed?
Well, do not then, for since you love me not,
Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.
And when I am a-horseback I will swear
Whither I go, nor reason whereabout.
Whither I must, I must; and to conclude
This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.
Than Harry Percy's wife; constant you are,
But yet a woman; and for secrecy
No lady closer, for I well believe
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know,
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.
Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate,
Whither I go, thither shall you go too.
Today will I set forth, tomorrow you.
Will this content you, Kate?
Christian names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis. They
England, I shall command all the good lads in
Eastcheap. They call drinking deep "dyeing scarlet,"
Ralph.
Francis; or, Francis, o' Thursday; or indeed, Francis,
My lord, old Sir John with half a dozen more are at
Adam to the pupil age of this present twelve
What's o'clock, Francis?
Ribs, call in Tallow.
Earth, then am I a shotten herring. There lives not
Wales!
Bardolph, and Peto.] If they speak more or
Kendal green when it was so dark thou couldst not
Hercules, but beware instinct. The lion will not
But, by the Lord, lads, I am glad you have the
Shall I give him his answer?
You are lions too. You ran away upon instinct. You
What instinct hadst thou for it?
Here comes lean Jack. Here comes bare-bone.--
How now, my sweet creature of bombast? How long
Hal, I was not an eagle's talon in the waist. I could
Sir John Bracy from your father. You must to the
Welsh hook--what a plague call you him?
Mortimer, and old Northumberland, and that
Percy, and that devil Glendower? Art thou not
Weep not, sweet queen, for trickling tears are vain.
For God's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen,
For tears do stop the floodgates of her eyes.
Falstaff; him keep with, the rest banish. And tell me
Manningtree ox with the pudding in his belly, that
That he is old, the more the pity; his white hairs do
Falstaff, valiant Jack Falstaff, and therefore more
Harry's company. Banish plump Jack, and banish
Francis exit.]
What's the matter?
They are come to search the house. Shall I let them
Sheriff, so; if not, let him enter. If I become not a
Now, Master Sheriff, what is your will with me?
First pardon me, my lord. A hue and cry
Hath followed certain men unto this house.
One of them is well known, my gracious lord.
The man I do assure you is not here,
For I myself at this time have employed him.
And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee
That I will by tomorrow dinner time
Send him to answer thee or any man
For anything he shall be charged withal.
And so let me entreat you leave the house.
Have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.
It may be so. If he have robbed these men,
He shall be answerable; and so farewell.
Indeed, my lord, I think it be two o'clock.
Item, a capon,...2s. 2d.
Item, sauce,...4d.
Item, sack, two gallons,...5s. 8d.
Item, anchovies and sack after supper,...2s. 6d.
Item, bread,...ob.
There let him sleep till day. I'll to the court in the
Glendower.]
These promises are fair, the parties sure,
And our induction full of prosperous hope.
Lord Mortimer and cousin Glendower,
Will you sit down? And uncle Worcester--
No, here it is. Sit, cousin Percy,
Sit, good cousin Hotspur, for by that name
As oft as Lancaster doth speak of you
His cheek looks pale, and with a rising sigh
He wisheth you in heaven.
As oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
Of burning cressets, and at my birth
The frame and huge foundation of the Earth
Shaked like a coward.
At the same season if your mother's cat
Had but kittened, though yourself had never been
And I say the Earth was not of my mind,
If you suppose as fearing you it shook.
The heavens were all on fire; the Earth did tremble.
And not in fear of your nativity.
Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth
In strange eruptions; oft the teeming Earth
Is with a kind of colic pinched and vexed
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
Within her womb, which, for enlargement striving,
Shakes the old beldam Earth and topples down
Steeples and moss-grown towers. At your birth
Our grandam Earth, having this distemp'rature,
In passion shook.
To tell you once again that at my birth
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.
These signs have marked me extraordinary,
And all the courses of my life do show
Where is he living, clipped in with the sea
That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,
Which calls me pupil or hath read to me?
And bring him out that is but woman's son
Can trace me in the tedious ways of art
And hold me pace in deep experiments.
Peace, cousin Percy. You will make him mad.
Why, so can I, or so can any man,
But will they come when you do call for them?
Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command the
And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil
By telling truth. Tell truth and shame the devil.
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him
Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.
Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head
Against my power; thrice from the banks of Wye
And sandy-bottomed Severn have I sent him
Bootless home and weather-beaten back.
Home without boots, and in foul weather too!
How 'scapes he agues, in the devil's name?
Come, here is the map. Shall we divide our right
According to our threefold order ta'en?
The Archdeacon hath divided it
Into three limits very equally:
England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,
By south and east is to my part assigned;
All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,
And all the fertile land within that bound
To Owen Glendower; and, dear coz, to you
The remnant northward lying off from Trent.
And our indentures tripartite are drawn,
Which being sealed interchangeably--
Tomorrow, cousin Percy, you and I
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth
To meet your father and the Scottish power,
As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.
My father Glendower is not ready yet,
Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days.
Your tenants, friends, and neighboring gentlemen.
And in my conduct shall your ladies come,
From whom you now must steal and take no leave,
For there will be a world of water shed
Upon the parting of your wives and you.
Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here,
In quantity equals not one of yours.
See how this river comes me cranking in
And cuts me from the best of all my land
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run
In a new channel, fair and evenly.
It shall not wind with such a deep indent
To rob me of so rich a bottom here.
Not wind? It shall, it must. You see it doth.
Yea, but mark how he bears his course, and runs
With like advantage on the other side,
Gelding the opposed continent as much
As on the other side it takes from you.
Yea, but a little charge will trench him here
And on this north side win this cape of land,
And then he runs straight and even.
Let me not understand you, then; speak it in Welsh.
For I was trained up in the English court,
Where being but young I framed to the harp
Many an English ditty lovely well
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament--
Marry, and I am glad of it with all my heart.
Than one of these same meter balladmongers.
Or a dry wheel grate on the axletree,
And that would set my teeth nothing an edge,
Nothing so much as mincing poetry.
To any well-deserving friend;
But in the way of bargain, mark you me,
Are the indentures drawn? Shall we be gone?
The moon shines fair. You may away by night.
Break with your wives of your departure hence.
So much she doteth on her Mortimer.	
Fie, cousin Percy, how you cross my father!
With telling me of the moldwarp and the ant,
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,
And of a dragon and a finless fish,
And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff
As puts me from my faith. I tell you what--
He held me last night at least nine hours
In reckoning up the several devils' names
That were his lackeys. I cried "Hum," and "Well, go
But marked him not a word. O, he is as tedious
As a tired horse, a railing wife,
Worse than a smoky house. I had rather live
With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,
Than feed on cates and have him talk to me
In any summer house in Christendom.
In faith, he is a worthy gentleman,
Exceedingly well read and profited
In strange concealments, valiant as a lion,
And wondrous affable, and as bountiful
As mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin?
He holds your temper in a high respect
And curbs himself even of his natural scope
When you come cross his humor. Faith, he does.
Might so have tempted him as you have done
Without the taste of danger and reproof.
But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
In faith, my lord, you are too willful-blame,
And, since your coming hither, have done enough
To put him quite besides his patience.
You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault.
Though sometimes it show greatness, courage,
And that's the dearest grace it renders you--
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,
Defect of manners, want of government,
Pride, haughtiness, opinion, and disdain,
The least of which, haunting a nobleman,
Loseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stain
Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
Beguiling them of commendation.
Well, I am schooled. Good manners be your speed!
Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.
This is the deadly spite that angers me:
My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.
My daughter weeps; she'll not part with you.
She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.
Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy
Shall follow in your conduct speedily.
She is desperate here, a peevish self-willed harlotry,
One that no persuasion can do good upon.
Which thou pourest down from these swelling
In such a parley should I answer thee.
And that's a feeling disputation;
But I will never be a truant, love,
Till I have learned thy language; for thy tongue
Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penned,
Sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower,
With ravishing division, to her lute.
Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down
And rest your gentle head upon her lap,
And she will sing the song that pleaseth you,
And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep,
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep
As is the difference betwixt day and night
The hour before the heavenly harnessed team
Begins his golden progress in the east.
With all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing.
By that time will our book, I think, be drawn.
Do so, and those musicians that shall play to you
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,
And straight they shall be here. Sit and attend.
Come, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down.
Come, quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy
Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh,
And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous.
By 'r Lady, he is a good musician.
Irish.
And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths
As if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury.
Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art,
And such protest of pepper-gingerbread
To velvet-guards and Sunday citizens.
Come, sing.
Come, come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slow
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.
By this our book is drawn. We'll but seal,
And then to horse immediately.
Lords, give us leave; the Prince of Wales and I
Must have some private conference, but be near at
For we shall presently have need of you.
For some displeasing service I have done,
That, in His secret doom, out of my blood
He'll breed revengement and a scourge for me.
But thou dost in thy passages of life
Make me believe that thou art only marked
For the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven
To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else,
Could such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean
Such barren pleasures, rude society
As thou art matched withal, and grafted to,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood,
And hold their level with thy princely heart?
So please your Majesty, I would I could
Quit all offenses with as clear excuse
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
Myself of many I am charged withal.
Yet such extenuation let me beg
As, in reproof of many tales devised,
Which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear,
By smiling pickthanks and base newsmongers,
Hath faulty wandered and irregular,
Find pardon on my true submission.
God pardon thee. Yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy affections, which do hold a wing
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors.
Thy place in council thou hast rudely lost,
Which by thy younger brother is supplied,
And art almost an alien to the hearts
Of all the court and princes of my blood.
The hope and expectation of thy time
Is ruined, and the soul of every man
Prophetically do forethink thy fall.
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common-hackneyed in the eyes of men,
So stale and cheap to vulgar company,
Opinion, that did help me to the crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession
And left me in reputeless banishment,
By being seldom seen, I could not stir
But like a comet I was wondered at,
That men would tell their children "This is he."
Others would say "Where? Which is Bolingbroke?"
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,
And dressed myself in such humility
That I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,
Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths,
Even in the presence of the crowned king.
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new,
My presence, like a robe pontifical,
Ne'er seen but wondered at, and so my state,
Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feast
And won by rareness such solemnity.
The skipping king, he ambled up and down
With shallow jesters and rash bavin wits,
Soon kindled and soon burnt; carded his state,
Mingled his royalty with cap'ring fools,
Had his great name profaned with their scorns,
And gave his countenance, against his name,
To laugh at gibing boys and stand the push
Of every beardless vain comparative;
Grew a companion to the common streets,
Enfeoffed himself to popularity,
That, being daily swallowed by men's eyes,
They surfeited with honey and began
To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little
More than a little is by much too much.
So, when he had occasion to be seen,
He was but as the cuckoo is in June,
Heard, not regarded; seen, but with such eyes
As, sick and blunted with community,
Afford no extraordinary gaze
Such as is bent on sunlike majesty
When it shines seldom in admiring eyes,
But rather drowsed and hung their eyelids down,
Slept in his face, and rendered such aspect
As cloudy men use to their adversaries,
Being with his presence glutted, gorged, and full.
And in that very line, Harry, standest thou,
For thou hast lost thy princely privilege
With vile participation. Not an eye
But is aweary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more,
Which now doth that I would not have it do,
Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.
Be more myself.
As thou art to this hour was Richard then
When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh,
And even as I was then is Percy now.
Now, by my scepter, and my soul to boot,
He hath more worthy interest to the state
Than thou, the shadow of succession.
For of no right, nor color like to right,
He doth fill fields with harness in the realm,
Turns head against the lion's armed jaws,
And, being no more in debt to years than thou,
Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on
To bloody battles and to bruising arms.
What never-dying honor hath he got
Against renowned Douglas, whose high deeds,
Whose hot incursions and great name in arms,
Holds from all soldiers chief majority
And military title capital
Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ.
Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swaddling
This infant warrior, in his enterprises
Discomfited great Douglas, ta'en him once,
Enlarged him, and made a friend of him,
To fill the mouth of deep defiance up
And shake the peace and safety of our throne.
And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland,
The Archbishop's Grace of York, Douglas,
Mortimer,
Capitulate against us and are up.
But wherefore do I tell these news to thee?
Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes,
Which art my nearest and dearest enemy?
Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear,
Base inclination, and the start of spleen,
To fight against me under Percy's pay,
To dog his heels, and curtsy at his frowns,
To show how much thou art degenerate.
Do not think so. You shall not find it so.
And God forgive them that so much have swayed
Your Majesty's good thoughts away from me.
And, in the closing of some glorious day,
Be bold to tell you that I am your son,
When I will wear a garment all of blood
And stain my favors in a bloody mask,
Which, washed away, shall scour my shame with it.
And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights,
That this same child of honor and renown,
This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight,
And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet.
For every honor sitting on his helm,
Would they were multitudes, and on my head
My shames redoubled! For the time will come
That I shall make this northern youth exchange
His glorious deeds for my indignities.
Percy is but my factor, good my lord,
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf.
And I will call him to so strict account
That he shall render every glory up,
Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
This in the name of God I promise here,
The which if He be pleased I shall perform,
The long-grown wounds of my intemperance.
If not, the end of life cancels all bands,
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.
How now, good Blunt? Thy looks are full of speed.
So hath the business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word
That Douglas and the English rebels met
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury.
If promises be kept on every hand,
As ever offered foul play in a state.
The Earl of Westmoreland set forth today,
With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster,
For this advertisement is five days old.--
On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward.
On Thursday we ourselves will march. Our meeting
Is Bridgenorth. And, Harry, you shall march
Through Gloucestershire; by which account,
Our business valued, some twelve days hence
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.
Our hands are full of business. Let's away.
Advantage feeds him fat while men delay.
Why, my skin hangs about me like an old lady's
Well, I'll repent, and that suddenly, while I am in
Knight of the Burning Lamp.
How now, Dame Partlet the hen, have you enquired
The tithe of a hair was never lost in my house
John, for your diet and by-drinkings and money
Let him pay.
How now, lad, is the wind in that door, i' faith? Must
Dost thou think I'll fear thee as I fear thy father?
Nay, an I do, I pray God my girdle break.
Jack Falstaff do in the days of villainy? Thou seest I
Nay, prithee, begone.  Now, Hal, to
Go, bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster,
To my brother John; this to my Lord of
Westmoreland.	
Go, Peto, to horse, to horse, for thou and I
Have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time.
Jack, meet me tomorrow in the Temple hall
At two o'clock in the afternoon;
There shalt thou know thy charge, and there receive
Money and order for their furniture.
The land is burning. Percy stands on high,
And either we or they must lower lie.	
Rare words, brave world!--Hostess, my breakfast,
Well said, my noble Scot. If speaking truth
In this fine age were not thought flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have
As not a soldier of this season's stamp
Should go so general current through the world.
By God, I cannot flatter. I do defy
The tongues of soothers. But a braver place
In my heart's love hath no man than yourself.
Nay, task me to my word; approve me, lord.
No man so potent breathes upon the ground
But I will beard him.
What letters hast thou there?  I can but
Letters from him! Why comes he not himself?
He cannot come, my lord. He is grievous sick.
Zounds, how has he the leisure to be sick
In such a justling time? Who leads his power?
Under whose government come they along?
His letters bears his mind, not I, my lord.
He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth,
And, at the time of my departure thence,
He was much feared by his physicians.
Ere he by sickness had been visited.
His health was never better worth than now.
Sick now? Droop now? This sickness doth infect
The very lifeblood of our enterprise.
He writes me here that inward sickness--
And that his friends by deputation
Could not so soon be drawn, nor did he think it
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On any soul removed but on his own;
Yet doth he give us bold advertisement
That with our small conjunction we should on
To see how fortune is disposed to us,
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now,
Because the King is certainly possessed
Of all our purposes. What say you to it?
Your father's sickness is a maim to us.
And yet, in faith, it is not. His present want
Seems more than we shall find it. Were it good
To set the exact wealth of all our states
All at one cast? To set so rich a main
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?
It were not good, for therein should we read
The very bottom and the soul of hope,
The very list, the very utmost bound
Of all our fortunes.
Faith, and so we should, where now remains
Upon the hope of what is to come in.
If that the devil and mischance look big
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.
But yet I would your father had been here.
The quality and hair of our attempt
Brooks no division. It will be thought
By some that know not why he is away
That wisdom, loyalty, and mere dislike
Of our proceedings kept the Earl from hence.
And think how such an apprehension
May turn the tide of fearful faction
And breed a kind of question in our cause.
For well you know, we of the off'ring side
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrament,
And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whence
The eye of reason may pry in upon us.
This absence of your father's draws a curtain
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
Before not dreamt of.
It lends a luster and more great opinion,
Than if the Earl were here, for men must think
If we without his help can make a head
To push against a kingdom, with his help
We shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down.
Yet all goes well; yet all our joints are whole.
As heart can think. There is not such a word
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.
My cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul.
Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.
The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong,
Is marching hitherwards, with him Prince John.
No harm, what more?
The King himself in person is set forth,
Or hitherwards intended speedily,
With strong and mighty preparation.
He shall be welcome too. Where is his son,
The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,
And his comrades, that daffed the world aside
And bid it pass?
All plumed like estridges that with the wind
Bated like eagles having lately bathed,
Glittering in golden coats like images,
As full of spirit as the month of May,
And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer,
Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.
His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly armed,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury
And vaulted with such ease into his seat
As if an angel dropped down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.
No more, no more! Worse than the sun in March
This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come.
They come like sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war
All hot and bleeding will we offer them.
The mailed Mars shall on his altar sit
Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh
And yet not ours. Come, let me taste my horse,
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales.
Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse,
Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse.
He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.
That's the worst tidings that I hear of yet.
Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
What may the King's whole battle reach unto?
To thirty thousand.
My father and Glendower being both away,
The powers of us may serve so great a day.
Come, let us take a muster speedily.
Doomsday is near. Die all, die merrily.
Talk not of dying. I am out of fear
Of death or death's hand for this one half year.
There's not a shirt and a half in all my company,
Westmoreland, I cry you mercy. I thought your
Honor had already been at Shrewsbury.
To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a
Fits a dull fighter and a keen guest.
We'll fight with him tonight.
You give him then advantage.
Why say you so? Looks he not for supply?
Good cousin, be advised. Stir not tonight.
Do not, my lord.
You speak it out of fear and cold heart.
Do me no slander, Douglas. By my life
If well-respected honor bid me on,
As you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives.
Let it be seen tomorrow in the battle
Which of us fears.
Come, come, it may not be. I wonder much,
Being men of such great leading as you are,
That you foresee not what impediments
Drag back our expedition. Certain horse
Of my cousin Vernon's are not yet come up.
Your uncle Worcester's horse came but today,
And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
Their courage with hard labor tame and dull,
That not a horse is half the half of himself.
So are the horses of the enemy
In general journey-bated and brought low.
The better part of ours are full of rest.
The number of the King exceedeth ours.
For God's sake, cousin, stay till all come in.
If you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.
Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt, and would to God
You were of our determination.
Some of us love you well, and even those some
Envy your great deservings and good name
Because you are not of our quality
But stand against us like an enemy.
And God defend but still I should stand so,
So long as out of limit and true rule
You stand against anointed majesty.
But to my charge. The King hath sent to know
The nature of your griefs, and whereupon
You conjure from the breast of civil peace
Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land
Audacious cruelty. If that the King
Have any way your good deserts forgot,
Which he confesseth to be manifold,
He bids you name your griefs, and with all speed
You shall have your desires with interest
And pardon absolute for yourself and these
Herein misled by your suggestion.
The King is kind, and well we know the King
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.
My father and my uncle and myself
Did give him that same royalty he wears,
And when he was not six-and-twenty strong,
Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,
My father gave him welcome to the shore;
And when he heard him swear and vow to God
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
To sue his livery, and beg his peace
With tears of innocency and terms of zeal,
My father, in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance and performed it too.
Now when the lords and barons of the realm
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
The more and less came in with cap and knee,
Met him in boroughs, cities, villages,
Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,
Laid gifts before him, proffered him their oaths,
Gave him their heirs as pages, followed him
Even at the heels in golden multitudes.
He presently, as greatness knows itself,
Steps me a little higher than his vow
Made to my father while his blood was poor
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh,
And now forsooth takes on him to reform
Some certain edicts and some strait decrees
That lie too heavy on the commonwealth,
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep
Over his country's wrongs, and by this face,
This seeming brow of justice, did he win
The hearts of all that he did angle for,
Proceeded further--cut me off the heads
Of all the favorites that the absent king
In deputation left behind him here
When he was personal in the Irish war.
Tut, I came not to hear this.
In short time after, he deposed the King,
Soon after that deprived him of his life
And, in the neck of that, tasked the whole state.
To make that worse, suffered his kinsman March
Indeed his king) to be engaged in Wales,
There without ransom to lie forfeited,
Disgraced me in my happy victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence,
Rated mine uncle from the council board,
In rage dismissed my father from the court,
Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,
And in conclusion drove us to seek out
This head of safety, and withal to pry
Into his title, the which we find
Too indirect for long continuance.
Shall I return this answer to the King?
Not so, Sir Walter. We'll withdraw awhile.
Go to the King, and let there be impawned
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the morning early shall mine uncle
Bring him our purposes. And so farewell.
And maybe so we shall.
Hie, good Sir Michael, bear this sealed brief
With winged haste to the Lord Marshal,
This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest
To whom they are directed. If you knew
How much they do import, you would make haste.
My good lord, I guess their tenor.
Tomorrow, good Sir Michael, is a day
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
Must bide the touch. For, sir, at Shrewsbury,
As I am truly given to understand,
The King with mighty and quick-raised power
Meets with Lord Harry. And I fear, Sir Michael,
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Whose power was in the first proportion,
And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,
Who with them was a rated sinew too
And comes not in, o'erruled by prophecies,
To wage an instant trial with the King.
Why, my good lord, you need not fear.
There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.
But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,
And there is my Lord of Worcester, and a head
Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.
And so there is. But yet the King hath drawn
The special head of all the land together:
The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
The noble Westmoreland, and warlike Blunt,
And many more corrivals and dear men
Of estimation and command in arms.
Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.
And to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed.
For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the King
Dismiss his power he means to visit us,
For he hath heard of our confederacy,
And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him.
Therefore make haste. I must go write again
To other friends. And so farewell, Sir Michael.
Sir Walter Blunt, and Falstaff.]
How bloodily the sun begins to peer
Above yon bulky hill. The day looks pale
At his distemp'rature.
Doth play the trumpet to his purposes,
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves
Foretells a tempest and a blust'ring day.
Then with the losers let it sympathize,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.
How now, my Lord of Worcester? 'Tis not well
That you and I should meet upon such terms
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust
And made us doff our easy robes of peace
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel.
This is not well, my lord; this is not well.
What say you to it? Will you again unknit
This churlish knot of all-abhorred war
And move in that obedient orb again
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhaled meteor,
Of broached mischief to the unborn times?
For mine own part I could be well content
To entertain the lag end of my life
With quiet hours. For I protest
You have not sought it. How comes it then?
It pleased your Majesty to turn your looks
Of favor from myself and all our house;
And yet I must remember you, my lord,
We were the first and dearest of your friends.
For you my staff of office did I break
In Richard's time, and posted day and night
To meet you on the way and kiss your hand
When yet you were in place and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.
It was myself, my brother, and his son
That brought you home and boldly did outdare
The dangers of the time. You swore to us,
And you did swear that oath at Doncaster,
That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state,
Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right,
The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster.
To this we swore our aid. But in short space
It rained down fortune show'ring on your head,
And such a flood of greatness fell on you--
What with our help, what with the absent king,
What with the injuries of a wanton time,
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
And the contrarious winds that held the King
So long in his unlucky Irish wars
That all in England did repute him dead--
And from this swarm of fair advantages
You took occasion to be quickly wooed
To gripe the general sway into your hand,
Forgot your oath to us at Doncaster;
And being fed by us, you used us so
As that ungentle gull, the cuckoo's bird,
Useth the sparrow--did oppress our nest,
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk
That even our love durst not come near your sight
For fear of swallowing; but with nimble wing
We were enforced for safety sake to fly
Out of your sight and raise this present head,
Whereby we stand opposed by such means
As you yourself have forged against yourself
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
And violation of all faith and troth
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.
These things indeed you have articulate,
Proclaimed at market crosses, read in churches,
To face the garment of rebellion
With some fine color that may please the eye
Of fickle changelings and poor discontents,
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news
Of hurlyburly innovation.
And never yet did insurrection want
Such water colors to impaint his cause,
Nor moody beggars starving for a time
Of pellmell havoc and confusion.
In both your armies there is many a soul
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter
If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew,
The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world
In praise of Henry Percy. By my hopes,
This present enterprise set off his head,
More active-valiant, or more valiant-young,
More daring or more bold, is now alive
To grace this latter age with noble deeds.
For my part, I may speak it to my shame,
And so I hear he doth account me too.
Yet this before my father's majesty:
Of his great name and estimation,
And will, to save the blood on either side,
Try fortune with him in a single fight.
And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Albeit considerations infinite
Do make against it.--No, good Worcester, no.
We love our people well, even those we love
That are misled upon your cousin's part.
And, will they take the offer of our grace,
Both he and they and you, yea, every man
Shall be my friend again, and I'll be his.
So tell your cousin, and bring me word
What he will do. But if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us,
And they shall do their office. So begone.
We will not now be troubled with reply.
We offer fair. Take it advisedly.
It will not be accepted, on my life.
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together
Are confident against the world in arms.
Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge,
For on their answer will we set on them,
And God befriend us as our cause is just.
Say thy prayers, and farewell.
Him that calls not on me? Well, 'tis no matter.
Honor pricks me on. Yea, but how if honor prick me
No. What is honor? A word. What is in that word
Who hath it? He that died o' Wednesday. Doth
The liberal and kind offer of the King.
It is not possible, it cannot be
The King should keep his word in loving us.
He will suspect us still and find a time
To punish this offense in other faults.
Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of
For treason is but trusted like the fox,
Who, never so tame, so cherished and locked up,
Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.
Look how we can, or sad or merrily,
Interpretation will misquote our looks,
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall,
The better cherished still the nearer death.
My nephew's trespass may be well forgot;
It hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood,
And an adopted name of privilege--
All his offenses live upon my head
And on his father's. We did train him on,
And his corruption being ta'en from us,
We as the spring of all shall pay for all.
Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know
In any case the offer of the King.
Deliver what you will; I'll say 'tis so.
Here comes your cousin.
Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland.--
Uncle, what news?
The King will bid you battle presently.
Defy him by the Lord of Westmoreland.
Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.
Marry, and shall, and very willingly.	
There is no seeming mercy in the King.
Did you beg any? God forbid!
Of his oath-breaking, which he mended thus
By now forswearing that he is forsworn.
He calls us "rebels," "traitors," and will scourge
With haughty arms this hateful name in us.
Arm, gentlemen, to arms. For I have thrown
And Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it,
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
The Prince of Wales stepped forth before the King,
And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.
And that no man might draw short breath today
But I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me,
How showed his tasking? Seemed it in contempt?
No, by my soul. I never in my life
Did hear a challenge urged more modestly,
Unless a brother should a brother dare
To gentle exercise and proof of arms.
He gave you all the duties of a man,
Trimmed up your praises with a princely tongue,
Spoke your deservings like a chronicle,
Making you ever better than his praise
By still dispraising praise valued with you,
And, which became him like a prince indeed,
He made a blushing cital of himself,
And chid his truant youth with such a grace
As if he mastered there a double spirit
Of teaching and of learning instantly.
There did he pause, but let me tell the world:
If he outlive the envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope
So much misconstrued in his wantonness.
Cousin, I think thou art enamored
On his follies. Never did I hear
Of any prince so wild a liberty.
But be he as he will, yet once ere night
That he shall shrink under my courtesy.--
Arm, arm with speed, and, fellows, soldiers,
Better consider what you have to do
Than I that have not well the gift of tongue
Can lift your blood up with persuasion.
To spend that shortness basely were too long
If life did ride upon a dial's point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour.
An if we live, we live to tread on kings;
If die, brave death, when princes die with us.
Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair
When the intent of bearing them is just.
My lord, prepare. The King comes on apace.
For I profess not talking. Only this:
Let each man do his best. And here draw I a sword,
Whose temper I intend to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal
In the adventure of this perilous day.
Now, Esperance! Percy! And set on.
Sound all the lofty instruments of war,
And by that music let us all embrace,
For, heaven to Earth, some of us never shall
Walter Blunt, disguised as the King.]
What is thy name that in the battle thus
Thou crossest me? What honor dost thou seek
Upon my head?
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus
Because some tell me that thou art a king.
The Lord of Stafford dear today hath bought
Thy likeness, for instead of thee, King Harry,
This sword hath ended him. So shall it thee,
Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
And thou shalt find a king that will revenge
Lord Stafford's death.
All's done, all's won; here breathless lies the King.
This, Douglas? No, I know this face full well.
Semblably furnished like the King himself.
Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?
The King hath many marching in his coats.
Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats.
Until I meet the King.
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.
There's honor for you. Here's no vanity. I am as hot
What, stand'st thou idle here? Lend me thy sword.
Many a nobleman lies stark and stiff
Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies,
Whose deaths are yet unrevenged. I prithee
Lend me thy sword.
He is indeed, and living to kill thee.
Give it me. What, is it in the case?
What, is it a time to jest and dally now?
Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.
Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.
Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.
Lead him to his tent.
Come, my lord, I'll lead you to your tent.
Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help,
And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
Where stained nobility lies trodden on,
And rebels' arms triumph in massacres.
We breathe too long. Come, cousin Westmoreland,
Our duty this way lies. For God's sake, come.
By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster.
Before, I loved thee as a brother, John,
But now I do respect thee as my soul.
With lustier maintenance than I did look for
Of such an ungrown warrior.
Another king! They grow like Hydra's heads.--
That wear those colors on them. What art thou
That counterfeit'st the person of a king?
The King himself, who, Douglas, grieves at heart,
So many of his shadows thou hast met
And not the very king. I have two boys
Seek Percy and thyself about the field,
But, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily,
And yet, in faith, thou bearest thee like a king.
But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be,
And thus I win thee.
Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like
Never to hold it up again. The spirits
Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt are in my arms.
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee,
Who never promiseth but he means to pay.
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,
And so hath Clifton. I'll to Clifton straight.
Thou hast redeemed thy lost opinion
And showed thou mak'st some tender of my life
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
That ever said I hearkened for your death.
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end
As all the poisonous potions in the world,
And saved the treacherous labor of your son.
Make up to Clifton. I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name.
My name is Harry Percy.
To share with me in glory any more.
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
Nor can one England brook a double reign
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
Nor shall it, Harry, for the hour is come
To end the one of us, and would to God
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine.
And all the budding honors on thy crest
Than those proud titles thou hast won of me.
They wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my
But thoughts, the slaves of life, and life, time's fool,
And time, that takes survey of all the world,
Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue. No, Percy, thou art dust,
And food for--	
For worms, brave Percy. Fare thee well, great heart.
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!
When that this body did contain a spirit,
But now two paces of the vilest earth
Is room enough. This earth that bears thee dead
Bears not alive so stout a gentleman.
If thou wert sensible of courtesy,
But let my favors hide thy mangled face;
And even in thy behalf I'll thank myself
For doing these fair rites of tenderness.
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven.
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not remembered in thy epitaph.
What, old acquaintance, could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell.
If I were much in love with vanity.
Death hath not struck so fat a deer today,
Though many dearer in this bloody fray.
Emboweled will I see thee by and by;
Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.	
How if he should counterfeit too, and rise? By my
Therefore I'll make him sure, yea, and I'll swear
Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me.
Therefore, sirrah,  with a new wound
Come, brother John. Full bravely hast thou fleshed
Thy maiden sword.
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
Breathless and bleeding on the ground.--Art thou
Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?
Without our ears. Thou art not what thou seem'st.
But if I be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a jack. There
Why, Percy I killed myself, and saw thee dead.
This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.
This is the strangest fellow, brother John.--
Come bring your luggage nobly on your back.
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
The trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours.
Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field
To see what friends are living, who are dead.
Lord John of Lancaster, Earl of Westmoreland, with
Worcester and Vernon prisoners, and Soldiers.]
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.--
Ill-spirited Worcester, did not we send grace,
Pardon, and terms of love to all of you?
And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary,
Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust?
Three knights upon our party slain today,
Had been alive this hour
If, like a Christian, thou hadst truly borne
Betwixt our armies true intelligence.
What I have done my safety urged me to.
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided it falls on me.
Bear Worcester to the death, and Vernon too.
Other offenders we will pause upon.
How goes the field?
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw
The fortune of the day quite turned from him,
The noble Percy slain, and all his men
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest,
And, falling from a hill, he was so bruised
That the pursuers took him. At my tent
The Douglas is, and I beseech your Grace
Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you
This honorable bounty shall belong.
Go to the Douglas and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free.
His valors shown upon our crests today
Have taught us how to cherish such high deeds,
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.
Which I shall give away immediately.
Then this remains, that we divide our power.
You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland,
Towards York shall bend you with your dearest
To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
Who, as we hear, are busily in arms.
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,
Meeting the check of such another day.
And since this business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.
Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to night!
Comets, importing change of times and states,
Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky,
And with them scourge the bad revolting stars
That have consented unto Henry's death:
King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long.
England ne'er lost a king of so much worth.
England ne'er had a king until his time.
Virtue he had, deserving to command;
His brandished sword did blind men with his beams;
His arms spread wider than a dragon's wings;
His sparkling eyes, replete with wrathful fire,
More dazzled and drove back his enemies
Than midday sun fierce bent against their faces.
What should I say? His deeds exceed all speech.
He ne'er lift up his hand but conquered.
We mourn in black; why mourn we not in blood?
Henry is dead and never shall revive.
Upon a wooden coffin we attend,
And Death's dishonorable victory
We with our stately presence glorify,
Like captives bound to a triumphant car.
What? Shall we curse the planets of mishap
That plotted thus our glory's overthrow?
Or shall we think the subtle-witted French
Conjurers and sorcerers, that, afraid of him,
By magic verses have contrived his end?
He was a king blest of the King of kings;
Unto the French the dreadful Judgment Day
So dreadful will not be as was his sight.
The battles of the Lord of Hosts he fought;
The Church's prayers made him so prosperous.
The Church? Where is it? Had not churchmen prayed,
His thread of life had not so soon decayed.
None do you like but an effeminate prince
Whom like a schoolboy you may overawe.
Gloucester, whate'er we like, thou art Protector
And lookest to command the Prince and realm.
Thy wife is proud; she holdeth thee in awe
More than God or religious churchmen may.
Name not religion, for thou lov'st the flesh,
And ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'st,
Except it be to pray against thy foes.
Cease, cease these jars, and rest your minds in peace!
Let's to the altar.--Heralds, wait on us.--
Instead of gold, we'll offer up our arms,
Since arms avail not, now that Henry's dead.
Posterity, await for wretched years
When at their mothers' moistened eyes babes shall
Our isle be made a nourish of salt tears,
And none but women left to wail the dead.
Henry the Fifth, thy ghost I invocate:
Prosper this realm, keep it from civil broils,
Combat with adverse planets in the heavens.
Than Julius Caesar or bright--
My honorable lords, health to you all.
Sad tidings bring I to you out of France,
Of loss, of slaughter, and discomfiture:
Guyen, Champaigne, Rheims, Roan, Orleance,
Paris, Gisors, Poitiers, are all quite lost.
What say'st thou, man, before dead Henry's corse?
Speak softly, or the loss of those great towns
Will make him burst his lead and rise from death.
Is Paris lost? Is Roan yielded up?
If Henry were recalled to life again,
These news would cause him once more yield the
How were they lost? What treachery was used?
No treachery, but want of men and money.
Amongst the soldiers, this is muttered:
That here you maintain several factions
And, whilst a field should be dispatched and fought,
You are disputing of your generals.
One would have ling'ring wars with little cost;
Another would fly swift, but wanteth wings;
By guileful fair words peace may be obtained.
Awake, awake, English nobility!
Let not sloth dim your honors new begot.
Cropped are the flower-de-luces in your arms;
Of England's coat, one half is cut away.	
Were our tears wanting to this funeral,
These tidings would call forth her flowing tides.
Me they concern; regent I am of France.
Give me my steeled coat, I'll fight for France.
Away with these disgraceful wailing robes.
Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes
To weep their intermissive miseries.
Lords, view these letters, full of bad mischance.
France is revolted from the English quite,
Except some petty towns of no import.
The Dauphin Charles is crowned king in Rheims;
The Bastard of Orleance with him is joined;
Reignier, Duke of Anjou, doth take his part;
The Duke of Alanson flieth to his side.	
The Dauphin crowned king? All fly to him?
We will not fly but to our enemies' throats.--
Bedford, if thou be slack, I'll fight it out.
Gloucester, why doubt'st thou of my forwardness?
An army have I mustered in my thoughts,
Wherewith already France is overrun.
My gracious lords, to add to your laments,
Wherewith you now bedew King Henry's hearse,
Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot and the French.
What? Wherein Talbot overcame, is 't so?
The circumstance I'll tell you more at large.
The tenth of August last, this dreadful lord,
Retiring from the siege of Orleance,
Having full scarce six thousand in his troop,
By three and twenty thousand of the French
Was round encompassed and set upon.
No leisure had he to enrank his men.
He wanted pikes to set before his archers,
Instead whereof, sharp stakes plucked out of hedges
They pitched in the ground confusedly
To keep the horsemen off from breaking in.
More than three hours the fight continued,
Where valiant Talbot, above human thought,
Enacted wonders with his sword and lance.
Hundreds he sent to hell, and none durst stand him;
Here, there, and everywhere, enraged, he slew.
The French exclaimed the devil was in arms;
All the whole army stood agazed on him.
His soldiers, spying his undaunted spirit,
And rushed into the bowels of the battle.
Here had the conquest fully been sealed up
If Sir John Fastolf had not played the coward.
He, being in the vaward, placed behind
With purpose to relieve and follow them,
Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke.
Hence grew the general wrack and massacre.
Enclosed were they with their enemies.
Thrust Talbot with a spear into the back,
Whom all France, with their chief assembled
Durst not presume to look once in the face.
Is Talbot slain then? I will slay myself
For living idly here, in pomp and ease,
Whilst such a worthy leader, wanting aid,
Unto his dastard foemen is betrayed.
And Lord Scales with him, and Lord Hungerford;
Most of the rest slaughtered or took likewise.
His ransom there is none but I shall pay.
His crown shall be the ransom of my friend.
Four of their lords I'll change for one of ours.
Farewell, my masters; to my task will I.
Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make,
To keep our great Saint George's feast withal.
Ten thousand soldiers with me I will take,
Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake.
So you had need; 'fore Orleance besieged,
The English army is grown weak and faint;
The Earl of Salisbury craveth supply
And hardly keeps his men from mutiny,
Since they so few watch such a multitude.
Remember, lords, your oaths to Henry sworn:
Either to quell the Dauphin utterly
Or bring him in obedience to your yoke.
To go about my preparation.	
To view th' artillery and munition,
And then I will proclaim young Henry king.
To Eltham will I, where the young king is,
Being ordained his special governor;
And for his safety there I'll best devise.	
Each hath his place and function to attend.
But long I will not be Jack-out-of-office.
The King from Eltham I intend to steal,
And sit at chiefest stern of public weal.
Warwick, Somerset, Attendants and
Heralds exit with the coffin.]
Alanson, and Reignier, marching with Drum
Mars his true moving, even as in the heavens
So in the Earth, to this day is not known.
Late did he shine upon the English side;
Now we are victors; upon us he smiles.
What towns of any moment but we have?
At pleasure here we lie, near Orleance.
Otherwhiles, the famished English, like pale ghosts,
Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.
They want their porridge and their fat bull beeves.
Either they must be dieted like mules
And have their provender tied to their mouths,
Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.
Let's raise the siege. Why live we idly here?
Talbot is taken, whom we wont to fear.
Remaineth none but mad-brained Salisbury,
And he may well in fretting spend his gall;
Nor men nor money hath he to make war.
Sound, sound alarum! We will rush on them.
Now for the honor of the forlorn French!
Him I forgive my death that killeth me
When he sees me go back one foot, or fly.
Whoever saw the like? What men have I!
Dogs, cowards, dastards! I would ne'er have fled
But that they left me 'midst my enemies.
Salisbury is a desperate homicide.
He fighteth as one weary of his life.
The other lords, like lions wanting food,
Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.
Froissart, a countryman of ours, records
England all Olivers and Rolands bred
During the time Edward the Third did reign.
More truly now may this be verified,
For none but Samsons and Goliases
It sendeth forth to skirmish. One to ten!
Lean rawboned rascals! Who would e'er suppose
They had such courage and audacity?
Let's leave this town, for they are hare-brained slaves,
And hunger will enforce them to be more eager.
Of old I know them; rather with their teeth
The walls they'll tear down than forsake the siege.
Their arms are set, like clocks, still to strike on;
Else ne'er could they hold out so as they do.
By my consent, we'll even let them alone.
Where's the Prince Dauphin? I have news for him.
Bastard of Orleance, thrice welcome to us.
Methinks your looks are sad, your cheer appalled.
Hath the late overthrow wrought this offence?
Be not dismayed, for succor is at hand.
Which, by a vision sent to her from heaven,
Ordained is to raise this tedious siege
And drive the English forth the bounds of France.
The spirit of deep prophecy she hath,
Exceeding the nine Sibyls of old Rome.
What's past and what's to come she can descry.
Speak, shall I call her in? Believe my words,
For they are certain and unfallible.
Go call her in.	
But first, to try her skill,
Reignier, stand thou as Dauphin in my place;
Question her proudly; let thy looks be stern.
By this means shall we sound what skill she hath.
Fair maid, is 't thou wilt do these wondrous feats?
Reignier, is 't thou that thinkest to beguile me?
Where is the Dauphin?--Come, come from behind.
Be not amazed; there's nothing hid from me.
In private will I talk with thee apart.--
Stand back, you lords, and give us leave a while.
She takes upon her bravely at first dash.
Dauphin, I am by birth a shepherd's daughter,
My wit untrained in any kind of art.
Heaven and Our Lady gracious hath it pleased
To shine on my contemptible estate.
Lo, whilst I waited on my tender lambs,
And to sun's parching heat displayed my cheeks,
God's Mother deigned to appear to me,
And in a vision full of majesty
Willed me to leave my base vocation
And free my country from calamity.
Her aid she promised and assured success.
In complete glory she revealed herself;
And whereas I was black and swart before,
With those clear rays which she infused on me
That beauty am I blest with, which you may see.
Ask me what question thou canst possible,
And I will answer unpremeditated.
My courage try by combat, if thou dar'st,
And thou shalt find that I exceed my sex.
Resolve on this: thou shalt be fortunate
If thou receive me for thy warlike mate.
Thou hast astonished me with thy high terms.
Only this proof I'll of thy valor make:
In single combat thou shalt buckle with me,
And if thou vanquishest, thy words are true;
Otherwise I renounce all confidence.
Decked with fine flower-de-luces on each side--
Out of a great deal of old iron I chose forth.
Then come, a' God's name! I fear no woman.
And while I live, I'll ne'er fly from a man.
Joan la Pucelle overcomes.]
Stay, stay thy hands! Thou art an Amazon,
And fightest with the sword of Deborah.
Christ's mother helps me; else I were too weak.
Whoe'er helps thee, 'tis thou that must help me.
Impatiently I burn with thy desire.
My heart and hands thou hast at once subdued.
Excellent Pucelle, if thy name be so,
Let me thy servant and not sovereign be.
For my profession's sacred from above.
When I have chased all thy foes from hence,
Then will I think upon a recompense.
Meantime look gracious on thy prostrate thrall.
My lord, methinks, is very long in talk.
Doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock,
Else ne'er could he so long protract his speech.
Shall we disturb him, since he keeps no mean?
He may mean more than we poor men do know.
These women are shrewd tempters with their
My lord, where are you? What devise you on?
Shall we give o'er Orleance, or no?
Why, no, I say. Distrustful recreants,
Fight till the last gasp. I'll be your guard.
What she says I'll confirm: we'll fight it out.
Assigned am I to be the English scourge.
This night the siege assuredly I'll raise.
Expect Saint Martin's summer, halcyons' days,
Since I have entered into these wars.
Glory is like a circle in the water,
Which never ceaseth to enlarge itself
Till by broad spreading it disperse to naught.
With Henry's death, the English circle ends;
Dispersed are the glories it included.
Now am I like that proud insulting ship
Which Caesar and his fortune bare at once.
Was Mahomet inspired with a dove?
Thou with an eagle art inspired then.
Helen, the mother of great Constantine,
Nor yet Saint Philip's daughters were like thee.
Bright star of Venus, fall'n down on the Earth,
How may I reverently worship thee enough?
Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.
Woman, do what thou canst to save our honors.
Drive them from Orleance and be immortalized.
Presently we'll try. Come, let's away about it.
No prophet will I trust if she prove false.
Since Henry's death I fear there is conveyance.
Where be these warders that they wait not here?--
Open the gates! 'Tis Gloucester that calls.
Who's there that knocks so imperiously?
It is the noble Duke of Gloucester.
Whoe'er he be, you may not be let in.
Villains, answer you so the Lord Protector?
The Lord protect him, so we answer him.
We do no otherwise than we are willed.
Who willed you? Or whose will stands but mine?
There's none Protector of the realm but I.--
Break up the gates! I'll be your warrantize.
Shall I be flouted thus by dunghill grooms?
Woodville, the lieutenant, speaks within.]
What noise is this? What traitors have we here?
Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?
Open the gates. Here's Gloucester that would enter.
Have patience, noble duke, I may not open.
The Cardinal of Winchester forbids.
From him I have express commandment
That thou nor none of thine shall be let in.
Fainthearted Woodville, prizest him 'fore me?
Arrogant Winchester, that haughty prelate
Whom Henry, our late sovereign, ne'er could brook?
Thou art no friend to God or to the King.
Open the gates, or I'll shut thee out shortly.
Open the gates unto the Lord Protector,
Or we'll burst them open if that you come not quickly.
How now, ambitious Humphrey, what means this?
Peeled priest, dost thou command me to be shut out?
And not Protector--of the King or realm.
Stand back, thou manifest conspirator,
Thou that contrived'st to murder our dead lord,
Thou that giv'st whores indulgences to sin!
If thou proceed in this thy insolence.
Nay, stand thou back. I will not budge a foot.
This be Damascus; be thou cursed Cain
To slay thy brother Abel, if thou wilt.
Thy scarlet robes, as a child's bearing-cloth,
Do what thou dar'st, I beard thee to thy face.
What, am I dared and bearded to my face?--
Draw, men, for all this privileged place.
Blue coats to tawny coats!	
Priest, beware your beard.
Under my feet I'll stamp thy cardinal's hat;
In spite of pope or dignities of Church,
Here by the cheeks I'll drag thee up and down.
Gloucester, thou wilt answer this before the Pope.
Winchester goose, I cry "a rope, a rope!"--
Now beat them hence; why do you let them stay?--
Thee I'll chase hence, thou wolf in sheep's array.--
Out, tawny coats, out, scarlet hypocrite!
Fie, lords, that you, being supreme magistrates,
Thus contumeliously should break the peace!
Peace, Mayor? Thou know'st little of my wrongs.
Here's Beaufort, that regards nor God nor king,
Hath here distrained the Tower to his use.
Here's Gloucester, a foe to citizens,
One that still motions war and never peace,
That seeks to overthrow religion
Because he is Protector of the realm,
And would have armor here out of the Tower
To crown himself king and suppress the Prince.
Naught rests for me in this tumultuous strife
But to make open proclamation.
Come, officer, as loud as e'er thou canst, cry.
Cardinal, I'll be no breaker of the law,
But we shall meet and break our minds at large.
Gloucester, we'll meet to thy cost, be sure.
Thy heartblood I will have for this day's work.
Mayor, farewell. Thou dost but what thou mayst.
Abominable Gloucester, guard thy head,
For I intend to have it ere long.
See the coast cleared, and then we will depart.
Sirrah, thou know'st how Orleance is besieged
And how the English have the suburbs won.
Father, I know, and oft have shot at them;
Howe'er, unfortunate, I missed my aim.
But now thou shalt not. Be thou ruled by me.
Chief master-gunner am I of this town;
Something I must do to procure me grace.
The Prince's espials have informed me
How the English, in the suburbs close entrenched,
Went through a secret grate of iron bars
In yonder tower, to overpeer the city,
And thence discover how with most advantage
They may vex us with shot or with assault.
To intercept this inconvenience,
And even these three days have I watched
If I could see them. Now do thou watch,
For I can stay no longer.
If thou spy'st any, run and bring me word;
And thou shalt find me at the Governor's.	
Father, I warrant you, take you no care;
Attendants and Others.]
Talbot, my life, my joy, again returned!
How wert thou handled, being prisoner?
Or by what means gott'st thou to be released?
Discourse, I prithee, on this turret's top.
The Duke of Bedford had a prisoner
Called the brave Lord Ponton de Santrailles;
For him was I exchanged and ransomed.
But with a baser man-of-arms by far
Once in contempt they would have bartered me,
Which I disdaining, scorned, and craved death
Rather than I would be so vile-esteemed.
In fine, redeemed I was as I desired.
But O, the treacherous Fastolf wounds my heart,
Whom with my bare fists I would execute
If I now had him brought into my power.
Yet tell'st thou not how thou wert entertained.
With scoffs and scorns and contumelious taunts.
In open marketplace produced they me
To be a public spectacle to all.
The scarecrow that affrights our children so."
Then broke I from the officers that led me,
And with my nails digged stones out of the ground
To hurl at the beholders of my shame.
My grisly countenance made others fly;
None durst come near for fear of sudden death.
In iron walls they deemed me not secure:
So great fear of my name 'mongst them were spread
That they supposed I could rend bars of steel
And spurn in pieces posts of adamant.
Wherefore a guard of chosen shot I had
That walked about me every minute-while;
And if I did but stir out of my bed,
Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.
He crosses the main stage and exits.]
But we will be revenged sufficiently.
Now it is supper time in Orleance.
Here, through this grate, I count each one
And view the Frenchmen how they fortify.
Let us look in; the sight will much delight thee.
Sir Thomas Gargrave and Sir William Glansdale,
Let me have your express opinions
Where is best place to make our batt'ry next?
And I, here, at the bulwark of the bridge.
For aught I see, this city must be famished
Or with light skirmishes enfeebled.
What chance is this that suddenly hath crossed us?--
Speak, Salisbury--at least if thou canst, speak!
How far'st thou, mirror of all martial men?
One of thy eyes and thy cheek's side struck off!--
Accursed tower, accursed fatal hand
That hath contrived this woeful tragedy!
In thirteen battles Salisbury o'ercame;
Henry the Fifth he first trained to the wars.
Whilst any trump did sound or drum struck up,
His sword did ne'er leave striking in the field.--
Yet liv'st thou, Salisbury? Though thy speech doth fail,
One eye thou hast to look to heaven for grace.
The sun with one eye vieweth all the world.
Heaven, be thou gracious to none alive
If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands!--
Sir Thomas Gargrave, hast thou any life?
Speak unto Talbot. Nay, look up to him.--
Bear hence his body; I will help to bury it.
Salisbury, cheer thy spirit with this comfort,
Thou shalt not die whiles--
He beckons with his hand and smiles on me
As who should say "When I am dead and gone,
Remember to avenge me on the French."
Plantagenet, I will; and, like thee, Nero,
Play on the lute, beholding the towns burn.
Wretched shall France be only in my name.
What stir is this? What tumult's in the heavens?
Whence cometh this alarum and the noise?
My lord, my lord, the French have gathered head.
The Dauphin, with one Joan la Pucelle joined,
Is come with a great power to raise the siege.
Hear, hear, how dying Salisbury doth groan;
It irks his heart he cannot be revenged.
Frenchmen, I'll be a Salisbury to you.
Pucelle or puzel, dauphin or dogfish,
Your hearts I'll stamp out with my horse's heels
And make a quagmire of your mingled brains.
Convey we Salisbury into his tent,
And then try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.
Dauphin and driveth him; then enter Joan la Pucelle,
Where is my strength, my valor, and my force?
Our English troops retire; I cannot stay them.
Here, here she comes!--I'll have a bout with thee.
Devil or devil's dam, I'll conjure thee.
Blood will I draw on thee--thou art a witch--
And straightway give thy soul to him thou serv'st.
Come, come; 'tis only I that must disgrace thee.
Heavens, can you suffer hell so to prevail?
My breast I'll burst with straining of my courage,
And from my shoulders crack my arms asunder,
But I will chastise this high-minded strumpet.
Talbot, farewell. Thy hour is not yet come.
Go, go, cheer up thy hunger-starved men.
Help Salisbury to make his testament.
This day is ours, as many more shall be.
My thoughts are whirled like a potter's wheel.
Drives back our troops, and conquers as she lists.
So bees with smoke and doves with noisome stench
Are from their hives and houses driven away.
They called us, for our fierceness, English dogs;
Now like to whelps we crying run away.
Hark, countrymen, either renew the fight,
Or tear the lions out of England's coat.
Renounce your soil; give sheep in lions' stead.
Sheep run not half so treacherous from the wolf,
Or horse or oxen from the leopard,
As you fly from your oft-subdued slaves.
It will not be! Retire into your trenches.
You all consented unto Salisbury's death,
For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.
Pucelle is entered into Orleance
In spite of us or aught that we could do.
The shame hereof will make me hide my head.
Dauphin, Reignier, Alanson, and Soldiers.]
Advance our waving colors on the walls.
Rescued is Orleance from the English.
Thus Joan la Pucelle hath performed her word.
Divinest creature, Astraea's daughter,
How shall I honor thee for this success?
Thy promises are like Adonis' garden
That one day bloomed and fruitful were the next.
France, triumph in thy glorious prophetess.
Recovered is the town of Orleance.
More blessed hap did ne'er befall our state.
Why ring not bells aloud throughout the town?
Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfires
And feast and banquet in the open streets
To celebrate the joy that God hath given us.
All France will be replete with mirth and joy
When they shall hear how we have played the men.
For which I will divide my crown with her,
And all the priests and friars in my realm
Shall in procession sing her endless praise.
Than Rhodophe's of Memphis ever was.
In memory of her, when she is dead,
Her ashes, in an urn more precious
Than the rich-jeweled coffer of Darius,
Transported shall be at high festivals
Before the kings and queens of France.
No longer on Saint Dennis will we cry,
But Joan la Pucelle shall be France's saint.
Come in, and let us banquet royally
After this golden day of victory.
Sirs, take your places and be vigilant.
If any noise or soldier you perceive
Near to the walls, by some apparent sign
Let us have knowledge at the court of guard.
Sergeant, you shall.	
Thus are poor servitors,
When others sleep upon their quiet beds,
Constrained to watch in darkness, rain, and cold.
Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy,
By whose approach the regions of Artois,
Walloon, and Picardy are friends to us,
This happy night the Frenchmen are secure,
Having all day caroused and banqueted.
Embrace we then this opportunity,
As fitting best to quittance their deceit
Contrived by art and baleful sorcery.
Coward of France, how much he wrongs his fame,
Despairing of his own arm's fortitude,
To join with witches and the help of hell!
Traitors have never other company.
But what's that Pucelle whom they term so pure?
Pray God she prove not masculine ere long,
If underneath the standard of the French
She carry armor as she hath begun.
Well, let them practice and converse with spirits.
God is our fortress, in whose conquering name
Let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.
Ascend, brave Talbot. We will follow thee.
Not all together. Better far, I guess,
That we do make our entrance several ways,
That if it chance the one of us do fail,
The other yet may rise against their force.
Agreed. I'll to yond corner.
And here will Talbot mount, or make his grave.
Now, Salisbury, for thee and for the right
Of English Henry, shall this night appear
How much in duty I am bound to both.
Arm, arm! The enemy doth make assault.
How now, my lords? What, all unready so?
Unready? Ay, and glad we scaped so well.
Hearing alarums at our chamber doors.
Of all exploits since first I followed arms
Ne'er heard I of a warlike enterprise
More venturous or desperate than this.
If not of hell, the heavens sure favor him.
Here cometh Charles. I marvel how he sped.
Tut, holy Joan was his defensive guard.
Is this thy cunning, thou deceitful dame?
Didst thou at first, to flatter us withal,
Make us partakers of a little gain
That now our loss might be ten times so much?
Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend?
At all times will you have my power alike?
Sleeping or waking, must I still prevail,
Or will you blame and lay the fault on me?--
Improvident soldiers, had your watch been good,
This sudden mischief never could have fall'n.
Duke of Alanson, this was your default,
That, being captain of the watch tonight,
Did look no better to that weighty charge.
Had all your quarters been as safely kept
As that whereof I had the government,
We had not been thus shamefully surprised.
Mine was secure.
And for myself, most part of all this night
Within her quarter and mine own precinct
About relieving of the sentinels.
Then how or which way should they first break in?
Question, my lords, no further of the case,
How or which way; 'tis sure they found some place
But weakly guarded, where the breach was made.
And now there rests no other shift but this:
To gather our soldiers, scattered and dispersed,
And lay new platforms to endamage them.
The cry of "Talbot" serves me for a sword,
For I have loaden me with many spoils,
Using no other weapon but his name.
The day begins to break and night is fled,
Whose pitchy mantle over-veiled the Earth.
Here sound retreat and cease our hot pursuit.
Bring forth the body of old Salisbury,
And here advance it in the marketplace,
The middle center of this cursed town.
Drums beating a dead march.]
Now have I paid my vow unto his soul:
For every drop of blood was drawn from him
There hath at least five Frenchmen died tonight.
And, that hereafter ages may behold
What ruin happened in revenge of him,
Within their chiefest temple I'll erect
Upon the which, that everyone may read,
Shall be engraved the sack of Orleance,
The treacherous manner of his mournful death,
And what a terror he had been to France.
But, lords, in all our bloody massacre,
His new-come champion, virtuous Joan of Arc,
Nor any of his false confederates.
Roused on the sudden from their drowsy beds,
They did amongst the troops of armed men
Leap o'er the walls for refuge in the field.
Myself, as far as I could well discern
For smoke and dusky vapors of the night,
Am sure I scared the Dauphin and his trull,
When arm-in-arm they both came swiftly running,
Like to a pair of loving turtledoves
That could not live asunder day or night.
After that things are set in order here,
We'll follow them with all the power we have.
All hail, my lords. Which of this princely train
Call you the warlike Talbot, for his acts
So much applauded through the realm of France?
Here is the Talbot. Who would speak with him?
The virtuous lady, Countess of Auvergne,
With modesty admiring thy renown,
By me entreats, great lord, thou wouldst vouchsafe
To visit her poor castle where she lies,
That she may boast she hath beheld the man
Whose glory fills the world with loud report.
Is it even so? Nay, then, I see our wars
Will turn unto a peaceful comic sport,
When ladies crave to be encountered with.
You may not, my lord, despise her gentle suit.
Ne'er trust me, then; for when a world of men
Could not prevail with all their oratory,
Yet hath a woman's kindness overruled.--
And therefore tell her I return great thanks,
And in submission will attend on her.--
Will not your Honors bear me company?
No, truly, 'tis more than manners will;
And I have heard it said unbidden guests
Are often welcomest when they are gone.
Well then, alone, since there's no remedy,
Come hither, captain.	
You perceive my mind?
Porter, remember what I gave in charge,
And when you have done so, bring the keys to me.
The plot is laid. If all things fall out right,
As Scythian Tamyris by Cyrus' death.
Great is the rumor of this dreadful knight,
And his achievements of no less account.
Fain would mine eyes be witness with mine ears
To give their censure of these rare reports.
Madam, according as your Ladyship desired,
By message craved, so is Lord Talbot come.
And he is welcome. What, is this the man?
Madam, it is.
Is this the Talbot, so much feared abroad
That with his name the mothers still their babes?
And large proportion of his strong-knit limbs.
Alas, this is a child, a silly dwarf!
It cannot be this weak and writhled shrimp
Should strike such terror to his enemies.
Madam, I have been bold to trouble you.
But since your Ladyship is not at leisure,
What means he now? Go ask him whither he goes.
Stay, my Lord Talbot, for my lady craves
To know the cause of your abrupt departure.
Marry, for that she's in a wrong belief,
If thou be he, then art thou prisoner.
Prisoner? To whom?
And for that cause I trained thee to my house.
Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me,
For in my gallery thy picture hangs.
But now the substance shall endure the like,
And I will chain these legs and arms of thine,
That hast by tyranny these many years
Wasted our country, slain our citizens,
And sent our sons and husbands captivate.
Laughest thou, wretch? Thy mirth shall turn to moan.
To think that you have aught but Talbot's shadow
Whereon to practice your severity.
No, no, I am but shadow of myself.
You are deceived; my substance is not here,
For what you see is but the smallest part
And least proportion of humanity.
It is of such a spacious lofty pitch
Your roof were not sufficient to contain 't.
This is a riddling merchant for the nonce:
He will be here and yet he is not here.
How can these contrarieties agree?
That will I show you presently.
How say you, madam? Are you now persuaded
That Talbot is but shadow of himself?
These are his substance, sinews, arms, and strength,
With which he yoketh your rebellious necks,
Razeth your cities, and subverts your towns,
And in a moment makes them desolate.
Victorious Talbot, pardon my abuse.
And more than may be gathered by thy shape.
Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath,
For I am sorry that with reverence
Be not dismayed, fair lady, nor misconster
The mind of Talbot as you did mistake
The outward composition of his body.
What you have done hath not offended me,
Nor other satisfaction do I crave
But only, with your patience, that we may
Taste of your wine and see what cates you have,
For soldiers' stomachs always serve them well.
With all my heart, and think me honored
To feast so great a warrior in my house.
William de la Pole the Earl of Suffolk,
Vernon, a Lawyer, and Others.]
Great lords and gentlemen, what means this silence?
Dare no man answer in a case of truth?
Within the Temple Hall we were too loud;
The garden here is more convenient.
Then say at once if I maintained the truth,
Or else was wrangling Somerset in th' error?
Faith, I have been a truant in the law
And never yet could frame my will to it,
And therefore frame the law unto my will.
Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then, between us.
Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch,
Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth,
Between two blades, which bears the better temper,
Between two horses, which doth bear him best,
Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye,
But in these nice sharp quillets of the law,
Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.
Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance!
The truth appears so naked on my side
That any purblind eye may find it out.
And on my side it is so well appareled,
So clear, so shining, and so evident,
That it will glimmer through a blind man's eye.
Since you are tongue-tied and so loath to speak,
In dumb significants proclaim your thoughts:
Let him that is a trueborn gentleman
And stands upon the honor of his birth,
If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,
From off this brier pluck a white rose with me.
Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer,
But dare maintain the party of the truth,
Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.
Of base insinuating flattery,
And say withal I think he held the right.
Stay, lords and gentlemen, and pluck no more
Till you conclude that he upon whose side
The fewest roses are cropped from the tree
Shall yield the other in the right opinion.
Good Master Vernon, it is well objected:
If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.
Then for the truth and plainness of the case,
Giving my verdict on the white rose side.
Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,
Lest, bleeding, you do paint the white rose red,
And fall on my side so against your will.
If I, my lord, for my opinion bleed,
Opinion shall be surgeon to my hurt
And keep me on the side where still I am.
Unless my study and my books be false,
The argument you held was wrong in law,
In sign whereof I pluck a white rose too.
Now, Somerset, where is your argument?
Here in my scabbard, meditating that
Shall dye your white rose in a bloody red.
Meantime your cheeks do counterfeit our roses,
For pale they look with fear, as witnessing
The truth on our side.
Blush for pure shame to counterfeit our roses,
And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.
Hath not thy rose a canker, Somerset?
Hath not thy rose a thorn, Plantagenet?
Ay, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth,
Whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood.
Well, I'll find friends to wear my bleeding roses
That shall maintain what I have said is true,
Where false Plantagenet dare not be seen.
Now, by this maiden blossom in my hand,
Turn not thy scorns this way, Plantagenet.
Proud Pole, I will, and scorn both him and thee.
Away, away, good William de la Pole!
We grace the yeoman by conversing with him.
Now, by God's will, thou wrong'st him, Somerset.
His grandfather was Lionel, Duke of Clarence,
Third son to the third Edward, King of England.
Spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root?
He bears him on the place's privilege,
Or durst not for his craven heart say thus.
By Him that made me, I'll maintain my words
On any plot of ground in Christendom.
Was not thy father Richard, Earl of Cambridge,
For treason executed in our late king's days?
And, by his treason, stand'st not thou attainted,
Corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry?
His trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood,
And, till thou be restored, thou art a yeoman.
My father was attached, not attainted,
Condemned to die for treason, but no traitor;
And that I'll prove on better men than Somerset,
Were growing time once ripened to my will.
For your partaker Pole and you yourself,
To scourge you for this apprehension.
Look to it well, and say you are well warned.
Ah, thou shalt find us ready for thee still,
And know us by these colors for thy foes,
For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.
And, by my soul, this pale and angry rose,
As cognizance of my blood-drinking hate,
Will I forever, and my faction, wear
Until it wither with me to my grave
Or flourish to the height of my degree.
Go forward, and be choked with thy ambition!
And so farewell, until I meet thee next.	
Have with thee, Pole.--Farewell, ambitious Richard.
How I am braved, and must perforce endure it!
This blot that they object against your house
Shall be whipped out in the next parliament,
Called for the truce of Winchester and Gloucester;
And if thou be not then created York,
Meantime, in signal of my love to thee,
Against proud Somerset and William Pole
Will I upon thy party wear this rose.
And here I prophesy: this brawl today,
Grown to this faction in the Temple garden,
Shall send, between the red rose and the white,
Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you,
That you on my behalf would pluck a flower.
In your behalf still will I wear the same.
And so will I.
Come, let us four to dinner. I dare say
This quarrel will drink blood another day.
Kind keepers of my weak decaying age,
Let dying Mortimer here rest himself.
Even like a man new-haled from the rack,
So fare my limbs with long imprisonment;
And these gray locks, the pursuivants of death,
Nestor-like aged in an age of care,
Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer;
These eyes, like lamps whose wasting oil is spent,
Wax dim, as drawing to their exigent;
Weak shoulders, overborne with burdening grief,
And pithless arms, like to a withered vine
That droops his sapless branches to the ground;
Yet are these feet, whose strengthless stay is numb,
Unable to support this lump of clay,
Swift-winged with desire to get a grave,
As witting I no other comfort have.
But tell me, keeper, will my nephew come?
Richard Plantagenet, my lord, will come.
We sent unto the Temple, unto his chamber,
And answer was returned that he will come.
Enough. My soul shall then be satisfied.
Poor gentleman, his wrong doth equal mine.
Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign,
Before whose glory I was great in arms,
This loathsome sequestration have I had;
And even since then hath Richard been obscured,
Deprived of honor and inheritance.
But now the arbitrator of despairs,
Just Death, kind umpire of men's miseries,
With sweet enlargement doth dismiss me hence.
That so he might recover what was lost.
My lord, your loving nephew now is come.
Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?
Ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly used,
Your nephew, late despised Richard, comes.
Direct mine arms I may embrace his neck
And in his bosom spend my latter gasp.
That I may kindly give one fainting kiss.
And now declare, sweet stem from York's great stock,
Why didst thou say of late thou wert despised?
First, lean thine aged back against mine arm,
And in that ease I'll tell thee my disease.
This day, in argument upon a case,
Some words there grew 'twixt Somerset and me,
Among which terms he used his lavish tongue
And did upbraid me with my father's death;
Which obloquy set bars before my tongue,
Else with the like I had requited him.
Therefore, good uncle, for my father's sake,
In honor of a true Plantagenet,
And for alliance' sake, declare the cause
My father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.
That cause, fair nephew, that imprisoned me
And hath detained me all my flow'ring youth
Within a loathsome dungeon, there to pine,
Was cursed instrument of his decease.
Discover more at large what cause that was,
For I am ignorant and cannot guess.
And death approach not ere my tale be done.
Henry the Fourth, grandfather to this king,
Deposed his nephew Richard, Edward's son,
The first begotten and the lawful heir
Of Edward king, the third of that descent;
During whose reign the Percies of the north,
Finding his usurpation most unjust,
Endeavored my advancement to the throne.
The reason moved these warlike lords to this
Was, for that--young Richard thus removed,
Leaving no heir begotten of his body--
For by my mother I derived am
From Lionel, Duke of Clarence, third son
To King Edward the Third; whereas he
From John of Gaunt doth bring his pedigree,
Being but fourth of that heroic line.
But mark: as in this haughty great attempt
They labored to plant the rightful heir,
Long after this, when Henry the Fifth,
Succeeding his father Bolingbroke, did reign,
Thy father, Earl of Cambridge then, derived
From famous Edmund Langley, Duke of York,
Marrying my sister that thy mother was,
Again, in pity of my hard distress,
Levied an army, weening to redeem
And have installed me in the diadem.
But, as the rest, so fell that noble earl
And was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers,
In whom the title rested, were suppressed.
Of which, my lord, your Honor is the last.
True, and thou seest that I no issue have
And that my fainting words do warrant death.
Thou art my heir; the rest I wish thee gather.
But yet be wary in thy studious care.
Thy grave admonishments prevail with me.
But yet methinks my father's execution
Was nothing less than bloody tyranny.
With silence, nephew, be thou politic;
Strong-fixed is the house of Lancaster,
And, like a mountain, not to be removed.
But now thy uncle is removing hence,
As princes do their courts when they are cloyed
With long continuance in a settled place.
Might but redeem the passage of your age.
Thou dost then wrong me, as that slaughterer doth
Which giveth many wounds when one will kill.
Mourn not, except thou sorrow for my good;
Only give order for my funeral.
And so farewell, and fair be all thy hopes,
And prosperous be thy life in peace and war.
And peace, no war, befall thy parting soul.
In prison hast thou spent a pilgrimage,
And like a hermit overpassed thy days.--
Well, I will lock his counsel in my breast,
And what I do imagine, let that rest.--
Keepers, convey him hence, and I myself
Will see his burial better than his life.
Here dies the dusky torch of Mortimer,
Choked with ambition of the meaner sort.
And for those wrongs, those bitter injuries,
Which Somerset hath offered to my house,
And therefore haste I to the Parliament,
Either to be restored to my blood,
Or make mine ill th' advantage of my good.
Winchester; Richard Plantagenet and Warwick,
Winchester snatches it, tears it.]
Com'st thou with deep premeditated lines,
With written pamphlets studiously devised?
Humphrey of Gloucester, if thou canst accuse
Or aught intend'st to lay unto my charge,
Do it without invention, suddenly,
As I with sudden and extemporal speech
Purpose to answer what thou canst object.
Presumptuous priest, this place commands my
Or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonored me.
Think not, although in writing I preferred
The manner of thy vile outrageous crimes,
That therefore I have forged or am not able
Verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen.
No, prelate, such is thy audacious wickedness,
Thy lewd, pestiferous, and dissentious pranks,
As very infants prattle of thy pride.
Thou art a most pernicious usurer,
Froward by nature, enemy to peace,
Lascivious, wanton, more than well beseems
And for thy treachery, what's more manifest,
In that thou laid'st a trap to take my life
As well at London Bridge as at the Tower?
Besides, I fear me, if thy thoughts were sifted,
The King, thy sovereign, is not quite exempt
From envious malice of thy swelling heart.
Gloucester, I do defy thee.--Lords, vouchsafe
To give me hearing what I shall reply.
If I were covetous, ambitious, or perverse,
As he will have me, how am I so poor?
Or how haps it I seek not to advance
Or raise myself, but keep my wonted calling?
And for dissension, who preferreth peace
More than I do, except I be provoked?
No, my good lords, it is not that offends;
It is not that that hath incensed the Duke.
It is because no one should sway but he,
No one but he should be about the King;
And that engenders thunder in his breast
And makes him roar these accusations forth.
But he shall know I am as good--
Thou bastard of my grandfather!
Ay, lordly sir; for what are you, I pray,
But one imperious in another's throne?
Am I not Protector, saucy priest?
And am not I a prelate of the Church?
Yes, as an outlaw in a castle keeps,
And useth it to patronage his theft.
Unreverent Gloucester!
Touching thy spiritual function, not thy life.
Rome shall remedy this.
My lord, it were your duty to forbear.
Ay, so the Bishop be not overborne.
Methinks my lord should be religious,
And know the office that belongs to such.
Methinks his Lordship should be humbler.
It fitteth not a prelate so to plead.
Yes, when his holy state is touched so near.
State holy, or unhallowed, what of that?
Is not his Grace Protector to the King?
Plantagenet, I see, must hold his tongue,
Lest it be said "Speak, sirrah, when you should;
Must your bold verdict enter talk with lords?"
Else would I have a fling at Winchester.
Uncles of Gloucester and of Winchester,
The special watchmen of our English weal,
To join your hearts in love and amity.
That two such noble peers as you should jar!
Believe me, lords, my tender years can tell
Civil dissension is a viperous worm
That gnaws the bowels of the commonwealth.
What tumult 's this?
Begun through malice of the Bishop's men.
Pity the city of London, pity us!
The Bishop and the Duke of Gloucester's men,
Forbidden late to carry any weapon,
Have filled their pockets full of pebble stones
And, banding themselves in contrary parts,
Do pelt so fast at one another's pate
That many have their giddy brains knocked out;
Our windows are broke down in every street,
And we, for fear, compelled to shut our shops.
We charge you, on allegiance to ourself,
To hold your slaught'ring hands and keep the peace.--
Pray, Uncle Gloucester, mitigate this strife.
Do what you dare, we are as
You of my household, leave this peevish broil,
And set this unaccustomed fight aside.
My lord, we know your Grace to be a man
Just and upright, and, for your royal birth,
Inferior to none but to his Majesty;
And ere that we will suffer such a prince,
So kind a father of the commonweal,
To be disgraced by an inkhorn mate,
We and our wives and children all will fight
And have our bodies slaughtered by thy foes.
Ay, and the very parings of our nails
Shall pitch a field when we are dead.
And if you love me, as you say you do,
Let me persuade you to forbear awhile.
Can you, my Lord of Winchester, behold
My sighs and tears, and will not once relent?
Who should be pitiful if you be not?
Or who should study to prefer a peace
If holy churchmen take delight in broils?
Yield, my Lord Protector--yield, Winchester--
Except you mean with obstinate repulse
To slay your sovereign and destroy the realm.
You see what mischief, and what murder too,
Hath been enacted through your enmity.
Then be at peace, except you thirst for blood.
He shall submit, or I will never yield.
Compassion on the King commands me stoop,
Or I would see his heart out ere the priest
Should ever get that privilege of me.
Behold, my Lord of Winchester, the Duke
Hath banished moody discontented fury,
As by his smoothed brows it doth appear.
Why look you still so stern and tragical?
Here, Winchester, I offer thee my hand.
Fie, Uncle Beaufort! I have heard you preach
That malice was a great and grievous sin;
And will not you maintain the thing you teach,
But prove a chief offender in the same?
Sweet king! The Bishop hath a kindly gird.--
For shame, my Lord of Winchester, relent;
What, shall a child instruct you what to do?
Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee;
Love for thy love and hand for hand I give.
Ay, but I fear me with a hollow heart.--
See here, my friends and loving countrymen,
This token serveth for a flag of truce
Betwixt ourselves and all our followers,
So help me God, as I dissemble not.
So help me God, as I intend it not.
How joyful am I made by this contract.
But join in friendship as your lords have done.
Accept this scroll, most gracious sovereign,
Which in the right of Richard Plantagenet
We do exhibit to your Majesty.
Well urged, my Lord of Warwick.--For, sweet prince,
An if your Grace mark every circumstance,
You have great reason to do Richard right,
Especially for those occasions
At Eltham Place I told your Majesty.
And those occasions, uncle, were of force.--
Therefore, my loving lords, our pleasure is
That Richard be restored to his blood.
Let Richard be restored to his blood;
So shall his father's wrongs be recompensed.
As will the rest, so willeth Winchester.
If Richard will be true, not that alone
But all the whole inheritance I give
That doth belong unto the house of York,
From whence you spring by lineal descent.
Thy humble servant vows obedience
And humble service till the point of death.
Stoop then, and set your knee against my foot;
And in reguerdon of that duty done
Rise, Richard, like a true Plantagenet,
And rise created princely Duke of York.
And so thrive Richard as thy foes may fall!
And as my duty springs, so perish they
That grudge one thought against your Majesty.
Welcome, high prince, the mighty Duke of York.
Perish, base prince, ignoble Duke of York.
Now will it best avail your Majesty
To cross the seas and to be crowned in France.
The presence of a king engenders love
Amongst his subjects and his loyal friends,
As it disanimates his enemies.
When Gloucester says the word, King Henry goes,
For friendly counsel cuts off many foes.
Your ships already are in readiness.
Ay, we may march in England or in France,
Not seeing what is likely to ensue.
This late dissension grown betwixt the peers
Burns under feigned ashes of forged love
And will at last break out into a flame.
As festered members rot but by degree
Till bones and flesh and sinews fall away,
So will this base and envious discord breed.
And now I fear that fatal prophecy
Which in the time of Henry named the Fifth
Was in the mouth of every sucking babe:
That Henry born at Monmouth should win all,
And Henry born at Windsor should lose all,
Which is so plain that Exeter doth wish
His days may finish ere that hapless time.
These are the city gates, the gates of Roan,
Through which our policy must make a breach.
Take heed. Be wary how you place your words;
Talk like the vulgar sort of market men
That come to gather money for their corn.
If we have entrance, as I hope we shall,
And that we find the slothful watch but weak,
That Charles the Dauphin may encounter them.
Our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city,
And we be lords and rulers over Roan;
Therefore we'll knock.
Qui la?
Poor market folks that come to sell their corn.
Enter, go in. The market bell is rung.
Now, Roan, I'll shake thy bulwarks to the ground.
Saint Dennis bless this happy stratagem
And once again we'll sleep secure in Roan.
Here entered Pucelle and her practisants.
Now she is there, how will she specify
By thrusting out a torch from yonder tower,
Which, once discerned, shows that her meaning is:
No way to that, for weakness, which she entered.
Behold, this is the happy wedding torch
That joineth Roan unto her countrymen,
But burning fatal to the Talbonites.
See, noble Charles, the beacon of our friend;
The burning torch, in yonder turret stands.
Now shine it like a comet of revenge,
Defer no time; delays have dangerous ends.
Enter and cry "The Dauphin!" presently,
And then do execution on the watch.
France, thou shalt rue this treason with thy tears,
If Talbot but survive thy treachery.
Pucelle, that witch, that damned sorceress,
Hath wrought this hellish mischief unawares,
That hardly we escaped the pride of France.
Good morrow, gallants. Want you corn for bread?
Before he'll buy again at such a rate.
Scoff on, vile fiend and shameless courtesan!
And make thee curse the harvest of that corn.
Your Grace may starve, perhaps, before that time.
What will you do, good graybeard? Break a lance
And run a-tilt at Death within a chair?
Foul fiend of France and hag of all despite,
Encompassed with thy lustful paramours,
Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant age
And twit with cowardice a man half dead?
Damsel, I'll have a bout with you again,
Or else let Talbot perish with this shame.
Are you so hot, sir? Yet, Pucelle, hold thy peace,
If Talbot do but thunder, rain will follow.
God speed the Parliament! Who shall be the Speaker?
Dare you come forth and meet us in the field?
Belike your Lordship takes us then for fools,
To try if that our own be ours or no.
But unto thee, Alanson, and the rest.
Will you, like soldiers, come and fight it out?
Seigneur, hang! Base muleteers of France,
Like peasant footboys do they keep the walls
And dare not take up arms like gentlemen.
Away, captains. Let's get us from the walls,
For Talbot means no goodness by his looks.--
Goodbye, my lord. We came but to tell you
That we are here.	
And there will we be too, ere it be long,
Or else reproach be Talbot's greatest fame.--
Vow, Burgundy, by honor of thy house,
Pricked on by public wrongs sustained in France,
Either to get the town again or die.
And I, as sure as English Henry lives,
And as his father here was conqueror,
As sure as in this late-betrayed town
Great Coeur-de-lion's heart was buried,
So sure I swear to get the town or die.
My vows are equal partners with thy vows.
But, ere we go, regard this dying prince,
The valiant Duke of Bedford.--Come, my lord,
We will bestow you in some better place,
Fitter for sickness and for crazy age.
Lord Talbot, do not so dishonor me.
Here will I sit, before the walls of Roan,
And will be partner of your weal or woe.
Courageous Bedford, let us now persuade you--
Not to be gone from hence, for once I read
That stout Pendragon, in his litter sick,
Came to the field and vanquished his foes.
Methinks I should revive the soldiers' hearts
Because I ever found them as myself.
Undaunted spirit in a dying breast,
Then be it so. Heavens keep old Bedford safe!--
And now no more ado, brave Burgundy,
But gather we our forces out of hand
And set upon our boasting enemy.
Bedford and Attendants remain.]
Whither away, Sir John Fastolf, in such haste?
Whither away? To save myself by flight.
We are like to have the overthrow again.
What, will you fly and leave Lord Talbot?
All the Talbots in the world, to save my life.
Cowardly knight, ill fortune follow thee.
Now, quiet soul, depart when heaven please,
For I have seen our enemies' overthrow.
What is the trust or strength of foolish man?
They that of late were daring with their scoffs
Are glad and fain by flight to save themselves.
Lost and recovered in a day again!
This is a double honor, Burgundy.
Yet heavens have glory for this victory.
Warlike and martial Talbot, Burgundy
Enshrines thee in his heart, and there erects
Thy noble deeds as valor's monuments.
Thanks, gentle duke. But where is Pucelle now?
Now where's the Bastard's braves and Charles his
What, all amort? Roan hangs her head for grief
That such a valiant company are fled.
Now will we take some order in the town,
Placing therein some expert officers,
And then depart to Paris to the King,
For there young Henry with his nobles lie.
What wills Lord Talbot pleaseth Burgundy.
But yet, before we go, let's not forget
The noble Duke of Bedford late-deceased,
But see his exequies fulfilled in Roan.
But kings and mightiest potentates must die,
For that's the end of human misery.
Dismay not, princes, at this accident,
Nor grieve that Roan is so recovered.
Care is no cure, but rather corrosive
For things that are not to be remedied.
Let frantic Talbot triumph for a while,
And like a peacock sweep along his tail;
We'll pull his plumes and take away his train,
If dauphin and the rest will be but ruled.
We have been guided by thee hitherto,
And of thy cunning had no diffidence.
One sudden foil shall never breed distrust.
Search out thy wit for secret policies,
And we will make thee famous through the world.
We'll set thy statue in some holy place
And have thee reverenced like a blessed saint.
Employ thee then, sweet virgin, for our good.
Then thus it must be; this doth Joan devise:
By fair persuasions mixed with sugared words
We will entice the Duke of Burgundy
To leave the Talbot and to follow us.
Ay, marry, sweeting, if we could do that,
France were no place for Henry's warriors,
Nor should that nation boast it so with us,
But be extirped from our provinces.
Forever should they be expulsed from France,
And not have title of an earldom here.
Your honors shall perceive how I will work
To bring this matter to the wished end.
Hark! By the sound of drum you may perceive
Their powers are marching unto Paris-ward.
There goes the Talbot with his colors spread,
And all the troops of English after him.
Now in the rearward comes the Duke and his.
Fortune in favor makes him lag behind.
Summon a parley; we will talk with him.
Who craves a parley with the Burgundy?
The princely Charles of France, thy countryman.
What say'st thou, Charles?--for I am marching hence.
Speak, Pucelle, and enchant him with thy words.
Brave Burgundy, undoubted hope of France,
Stay; let thy humble handmaid speak to thee.
Speak on, but be not over-tedious.
Look on thy country, look on fertile France,
And see the cities and the towns defaced
By wasting ruin of the cruel foe.
As looks the mother on her lowly babe
When death doth close his tender-dying eyes,
See, see the pining malady of France:
Behold the wounds, the most unnatural wounds,
Which thou thyself hast given her woeful breast.
Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help.
One drop of blood drawn from thy country's bosom
Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore.
Return thee therefore with a flood of tears,
And wash away thy country's stained spots.
Either she hath bewitched me with her words,
Or nature makes me suddenly relent.
Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee,
Doubting thy birth and lawful progeny.
Who join'st thou with but with a lordly nation
That will not trust thee but for profit's sake?
When Talbot hath set footing once in France
And fashioned thee that instrument of ill,
Who then but English Henry will be lord,
And thou be thrust out like a fugitive?
Call we to mind, and mark but this for proof:
Was not the Duke of Orleance thy foe?
And was he not in England prisoner?
But when they heard he was thine enemy,
They set him free, without his ransom paid,
In spite of Burgundy and all his friends.
See then, thou fight'st against thy countrymen,
And join'st with them will be thy slaughtermen.
Come, come, return; return, thou wandering lord.
Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.
Have battered me like roaring cannon-shot,
And made me almost yield upon my knees.--
Forgive me, country, and sweet countrymen;
And, lords, accept this hearty kind embrace.
My forces and my power of men are yours.
So, farewell, Talbot. I'll no longer trust thee.
Done like a Frenchman: turn and turn again.
Welcome, brave duke. Thy friendship makes us fresh.
And doth beget new courage in our breasts.
Pucelle hath bravely played her part in this
And doth deserve a coronet of gold.
Now let us on, my lords, and join our powers,
And seek how we may prejudice the foe.
Exeter; York, Warwick, and Vernon, with white roses;
Somerset, Suffolk, and Basset, with red roses.
To them, with his Soldiers, Talbot.]
My gracious prince and honorable peers,
Hearing of your arrival in this realm,
To do my duty to my sovereign;
In sign whereof, this arm, that hath reclaimed
To your obedience fifty fortresses,
Twelve cities, and seven walled towns of strength,
Besides five hundred prisoners of esteem,
Lets fall his sword before your Highness' feet,
And with submissive loyalty of heart
Ascribes the glory of his conquest got
First to my God, and next unto your Grace.
Is this the Lord Talbot, Uncle Gloucester,
That hath so long been resident in France?
Yes, if it please your Majesty, my liege.
Welcome, brave captain and victorious lord.
When I was young--as yet I am not old--
Long since we were resolved of your truth,
Your faithful service, and your toil in war;
Yet never have you tasted our reward
Or been reguerdoned with so much as thanks,
Because till now we never saw your face.
Therefore stand up; and for these good deserts
We here create you Earl of Shrewsbury;
And in our coronation take your place.	
Vernon and Basset exit.]
Now, sir, to you that were so hot at sea,
Disgracing of these colors that I wear
In honor of my noble Lord of York,
Dar'st thou maintain the former words thou spak'st?
Yes, sir, as well as you dare patronage
The envious barking of your saucy tongue
Against my lord the Duke of Somerset.
Sirrah, thy lord I honor as he is.
Why, what is he? As good a man as York.
Hark you, not so; in witness, take you that.
Villain, thou knowest the law of arms is such
That whoso draws a sword 'tis present death,
Or else this blow should broach thy dearest blood.
But I'll unto his Majesty, and crave
When thou shalt see I'll meet thee to thy cost.
Well, miscreant, I'll be there as soon as you,
And after meet you sooner than you would.
Exeter; York and Warwick, with white roses; Suffolk
Lord Bishop, set the crown upon his head.
God save King Henry, of that name the Sixth!
Now, Governor of Paris, take your oath.
That you elect no other king but him;
Esteem none friends but such as are his friends,
And none your foes but such as shall pretend
Malicious practices against his state:
This shall you do, so help you righteous God.
My gracious sovereign, as I rode from Callice
To haste unto your coronation,
Writ to your Grace from th' Duke of Burgundy.
Shame to the Duke of Burgundy and thee!
To tear the Garter from thy craven's leg,
Which I have done, because unworthily
Thou wast installed in that high degree.--
Pardon me, princely Henry and the rest.
This dastard, at the battle of Patay,
When but in all I was six thousand strong
And that the French were almost ten to one,
Before we met or that a stroke was given,
Like to a trusty squire did run away;
In which assault we lost twelve hundred men.
Myself and divers gentlemen besides
Were there surprised and taken prisoners.
Then judge, great lords, if I have done amiss,
Or whether that such cowards ought to wear
This ornament of knighthood--yea or no?
To say the truth, this fact was infamous
And ill beseeming any common man,
Much more a knight, a captain, and a leader.
When first this Order was ordained, my lords,
Knights of the Garter were of noble birth,
Valiant and virtuous, full of haughty courage,
Such as were grown to credit by the wars;
Not fearing death nor shrinking for distress,
But always resolute in most extremes.
He then that is not furnished in this sort
Doth but usurp the sacred name of knight,
Profaning this most honorable Order,
And should, if I were worthy to be judge,
Be quite degraded, like a hedge-born swain
That doth presume to boast of gentle blood.
Stain to thy countrymen, thou hear'st thy doom.
Be packing therefore, thou that wast a knight.
Henceforth we banish thee on pain of death.
And now, my lord protector, view the letter
Sent from our uncle, Duke of Burgundy.
What means his Grace that he hath changed his style?
No more but, plain and bluntly, "To the King"!
Hath he forgot he is his sovereign?
Or doth this churlish superscription
Pretend some alteration in good will?
What's here? 
Moved with compassion of my country's wrack,
Together with the pitiful complaints
Of such as your oppression feeds upon,
Forsaken your pernicious faction
And joined with Charles, the rightful king of France.
That in alliance, amity, and oaths
There should be found such false dissembling guile?
What? Doth my Uncle Burgundy revolt?
He doth, my lord, and is become your foe.
Is that the worst this letter doth contain?
It is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.
Why, then, Lord Talbot there shall talk with him
And give him chastisement for this abuse.--
How say you, my lord, are you not content?
Content, my liege? Yes. But that I am prevented,
Then gather strength and march unto him straight;
Let him perceive how ill we brook his treason
And what offense it is to flout his friends.
You may behold confusion of your foes.	
Grant me the combat, gracious sovereign.
And me, my lord, grant me the combat too.
This is my servant; hear him, noble prince.
And this is mine, sweet Henry; favor him.
Be patient, lords, and give them leave to speak.--
Say, gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim,
And wherefore crave you combat, or with whom?
With him, my lord, for he hath done me wrong.
And I with him, for he hath done me wrong.
What is that wrong whereof you both complain?
First let me know, and then I'll answer you.
Crossing the sea from England into France,
This fellow here with envious carping tongue
Upbraided me about the rose I wear,
Saying the sanguine color of the leaves
Did represent my master's blushing cheeks
When stubbornly he did repugn the truth
About a certain question in the law
Argued betwixt the Duke of York and him,
With other vile and ignominious terms.
In confutation of which rude reproach,
And in defense of my lord's worthiness,
And that is my petition, noble lord;
For though he seem with forged quaint conceit
To set a gloss upon his bold intent,
Yet know, my lord, I was provoked by him,
And he first took exceptions at this badge,
Pronouncing that the paleness of this flower
Bewrayed the faintness of my master's heart.
Will not this malice, Somerset, be left?
Your private grudge, my Lord of York, will out,
Though ne'er so cunningly you smother it.
Good Lord, what madness rules in brainsick men
When for so slight and frivolous a cause
Such factious emulations shall arise!
Good cousins both, of York and Somerset,
Quiet yourselves, I pray, and be at peace.
Let this dissension first be tried by fight,
And then your Highness shall command a peace.
The quarrel toucheth none but us alone;
Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.
There is my pledge; accept it, Somerset.
Nay, let it rest where it began at first.
Confirm it so, mine honorable lord.
Confirm it so? Confounded be your strife,
And perish you with your audacious prate!
Presumptuous vassals, are you not ashamed
With this immodest clamorous outrage
To trouble and disturb the King and us?--
And you, my lords, methinks you do not well
To bear with their perverse objections,
Much less to take occasion from their mouths
To raise a mutiny betwixt yourselves.
Let me persuade you take a better course.
It grieves his Highness. Good my lords, be friends.
Come hither, you that would be combatants:
Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favor,
Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause.--
And you, my lords, remember where we are:
In France, amongst a fickle wavering nation.
If they perceive dissension in our looks,
And that within ourselves we disagree,
How will their grudging stomachs be provoked
To willful disobedience and rebel!
Besides, what infamy will there arise
When foreign princes shall be certified
That for a toy, a thing of no regard,
King Henry's peers and chief nobility
Destroyed themselves and lost the realm of France!
My tender years, and let us not forgo
That for a trifle that was bought with blood.
Let me be umpire in this doubtful strife.
That anyone should therefore be suspicious
Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both.
As well they may upbraid me with my crown
Because, forsooth, the King of Scots is crowned.
But your discretions better can persuade
Than I am able to instruct or teach;
And therefore, as we hither came in peace,
So let us still continue peace and love.
Cousin of York, we institute your Grace
To be our regent in these parts of France;--
And good my Lord of Somerset, unite
Your troops of horsemen with his bands of foot;
And like true subjects, sons of your progenitors,
Go cheerfully together and digest
Your angry choler on your enemies.
Ourself, my lord protector, and the rest,
After some respite, will return to Callice;
From thence to England, where I hope ere long
To be presented, by your victories,
With Charles, Alanson, and that traitorous rout.
My Lord of York, I promise you the King
Prettily, methought, did play the orator.
And so he did, but yet I like it not
In that he wears the badge of Somerset.
Tush, that was but his fancy; blame him not.
And if iwis he did--but let it rest.
Other affairs must now be managed.
Exeter remains.]
Well didst thou, Richard, to suppress thy voice,
For had the passions of thy heart burst out,
More rancorous spite, more furious raging broils,
Than yet can be imagined or supposed.
But howsoe'er, no simple man that sees
This jarring discord of nobility,
This shouldering of each other in the court,
This factious bandying of their favorites,
But sees it doth presage some ill event.
But more when envy breeds unkind division:
There comes the ruin; there begins confusion.
Go to the gates of Bordeaux, trumpeter.
Summon their general unto the wall.
English John Talbot, captains, calls you forth,
Servant-in-arms to Harry, King of England,
And thus he would: open your city gates,
Be humble to us, call my sovereign yours,
And do him homage as obedient subjects,
And I'll withdraw me and my bloody power.
But if you frown upon this proffered peace,
You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
Lean Famine, quartering Steel, and climbing Fire,
Who, in a moment, even with the earth
Shall lay your stately and air-braving towers,
If you forsake the offer of their love.
Thou ominous and fearful owl of death,
Our nation's terror and their bloody scourge,
The period of thy tyranny approacheth.
On us thou canst not enter but by death;
For I protest we are well fortified
And strong enough to issue out and fight.
If thou retire, the Dauphin, well appointed,
Stands with the snares of war to tangle thee.
On either hand thee, there are squadrons pitched
To wall thee from the liberty of flight;
And no way canst thou turn thee for redress
But Death doth front thee with apparent spoil,
And pale Destruction meets thee in the face.
Ten thousand French have ta'en the Sacrament
To rive their dangerous artillery
Upon no Christian soul but English Talbot.
Lo, there thou stand'st, a breathing valiant man
Of an invincible unconquered spirit.
This is the latest glory of thy praise
That I, thy enemy, due thee withal;
For ere the glass that now begins to run
Finish the process of his sandy hour,
These eyes, that see thee now well-colored,
Shall see thee withered, bloody, pale, and dead.
Hark, hark, the Dauphin's drum, a warning bell,
Sings heavy music to thy timorous soul,
And mine shall ring thy dire departure out.
He fables not; I hear the enemy.
Out, some light horsemen, and peruse their wings.
How are we parked and bounded in a pale,
Mazed with a yelping kennel of French curs.
If we be English deer, be then in blood,
Not rascal-like to fall down with a pinch,
But rather, moody-mad and desperate stags,
Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steel
And make the cowards stand aloof at bay.
Sell every man his life as dear as mine
And they shall find dear deer of us, my friends.
God and Saint George, Talbot and England's right,
Prosper our colors in this dangerous fight!
Are not the speedy scouts returned again
That dogged the mighty army of the Dauphin?
They are returned, my lord, and give it out
That he is marched to Bordeaux with his power
To fight with Talbot. As he marched along,
By your espials were discovered
Two mightier troops than that the Dauphin led,
Which joined with him and made their march for
Bordeaux.	
That thus delays my promised supply
Of horsemen that were levied for this siege!
Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid,
And I am louted by a traitor villain
And cannot help the noble chevalier.
God comfort him in this necessity.
If he miscarry, farewell wars in France.
Thou princely leader of our English strength,
Never so needful on the earth of France,
Spur to the rescue of the noble Talbot,
Who now is girdled with a waist of iron
And hemmed about with grim destruction.
To Bordeaux, warlike duke! To Bordeaux, York!
Else farewell Talbot, France, and England's honor.
Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbot's place!
So should we save a valiant gentleman
By forfeiting a traitor and a coward.
Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep
That thus we die while remiss traitors sleep.
He dies, we lose; I break my warlike word;
We mourn, France smiles; we lose, they daily get,
All long of this vile traitor Somerset.
Then God take mercy on brave Talbot's soul,
And on his son, young John, who two hours since
This seven years did not Talbot see his son,
And now they meet where both their lives are done.
Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have
To bid his young son welcome to his grave?
Away! Vexation almost stops my breath,
That sundered friends greet in the hour of death.
Lucy, farewell. No more my fortune can
But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.
Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours are won away,
Long all of Somerset and his delay.
Thus while the vulture of sedition
Feeds in the bosom of such great commanders,
Sleeping neglection doth betray to loss
The conquest of our scarce-cold conqueror,
That ever-living man of memory,
Henry the Fifth. Whiles they each other cross,
Lives, honors, lands, and all hurry to loss.
It is too late; I cannot send them now.
This expedition was by York and Talbot
Too rashly plotted. All our general force
Might with a sally of the very town
Be buckled with. The overdaring Talbot
Hath sullied all his gloss of former honor
By this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure.
York set him on to fight and die in shame
That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.
Here is Sir William Lucy, who with me
Set from our o'er-matched forces forth for aid.
How now, Sir William, whither were you sent?
Whither, my lord? From bought and sold Lord Talbot,
Who, ringed about with bold adversity,
Cries out for noble York and Somerset
To beat assailing Death from his weak regions;
And whiles the honorable captain there
Drops bloody sweat from his war-wearied limbs
And, in advantage ling'ring, looks for rescue,
You, his false hopes, the trust of England's honor,
Keep off aloof with worthless emulation.
Let not your private discord keep away
The levied succors that should lend him aid,
While he, renowned noble gentleman,
Yield up his life unto a world of odds.
Orleance the Bastard, Charles, Burgundy,
Alanson, Reignier compass him about,
And Talbot perisheth by your default.
York set him on; York should have sent him aid.
And York as fast upon your Grace exclaims,
Swearing that you withhold his levied host
Collected for this expedition.
York lies. He might have sent and had the horse.
And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.
The fraud of England, not the force of France,
Hath now entrapped the noble-minded Talbot.
Never to England shall he bear his life,
But dies betrayed to fortune by your strife.
Come, go. I will dispatch the horsemen straight.
Within six hours they will be at his aid.
Too late comes rescue; he is ta'en or slain,
For fly he could not if he would have fled;
And fly would Talbot never, though he might.
If he be dead, brave Talbot, then adieu.
His fame lives in the world, his shame in you.
To tutor thee in stratagems of war,
That Talbot's name might be in thee revived
When sapless age and weak unable limbs
Should bring thy father to his drooping chair.
But--O, malignant and ill-boding stars!--
Now thou art come unto a feast of Death,
Therefore, dear boy, mount on my swiftest horse,
And I'll direct thee how thou shalt escape
By sudden flight. Come, dally not, be gone.
Is my name Talbot? And am I your son?
And shall I fly? O, if you love my mother,
Dishonor not her honorable name
To make a bastard and a slave of me!
The world will say "He is not Talbot's blood,
That basely fled when noble Talbot stood."
Fly, to revenge my death if I be slain.
He that flies so will ne'er return again.
If we both stay, we both are sure to die.
Then let me stay and, father, do you fly.
Your loss is great; so your regard should be.
My worth unknown, no loss is known in me.
Upon my death, the French can little boast;
In yours they will; in you all hopes are lost.
Flight cannot stain the honor you have won,
But mine it will, that no exploit have done.
You fled for vantage, everyone will swear;
But if I bow, they'll say it was for fear.
There is no hope that ever I will stay
If the first hour I shrink and run away.	
Here on my knee I beg mortality,
Rather than life preserved with infamy.
Shall all thy mother's hopes lie in one tomb?
Ay, rather than I'll shame my mother's womb.
Upon my blessing I command thee go.
To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.
Part of thy father may be saved in thee.
No part of him but will be shame in me.
Thou never hadst renown, nor canst not lose it.
Yes, your renowned name; shall flight abuse it?
Thy father's charge shall clear thee from that stain.
You cannot witness for me, being slain.
If death be so apparent, then both fly.
And leave my followers here to fight and die?
My age was never tainted with such shame.
And shall my youth be guilty of such blame?
No more can I be severed from your side
Than can yourself yourself in twain divide.
Stay, go, do what you will; the like do I,
For live I will not, if my father die.
Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son,
Born to eclipse thy life this afternoon.
Come, side by side, together live and die,
And soul with soul from France to heaven fly.
Saint George, and victory! Fight, soldiers, fight!
The Regent hath with Talbot broke his word
And left us to the rage of France his sword.
Where is John Talbot?--Pause, and take thy breath;
The life thou gav'st me first was lost and done
Till with thy warlike sword, despite of fate,
To my determined time thou gav'st new date.
When from the Dauphin's crest thy sword struck fire,
It warmed thy father's heart with proud desire
Of bold-faced victory. Then leaden age,
Quickened with youthful spleen and warlike rage,
Beat down Alanson, Orleance, Burgundy,
And from the pride of Gallia rescued thee.
The ireful Bastard Orleance, that drew blood
From thee, my boy, and had the maidenhood
Of thy first fight, I soon encountered,
And, interchanging blows, I quickly shed
Some of his bastard blood, and in disgrace
Bespoke him thus: "Contaminated, base,
And misbegotten blood I spill of thine,
Mean and right poor, for that pure blood of mine
Which thou didst force from Talbot, my brave boy."
Here, purposing the Bastard to destroy,
Came in strong rescue. Speak, thy father's care:
Art thou not weary, John? How dost thou fare?
Wilt thou yet leave the battle, boy, and fly,
Now thou art sealed the son of chivalry?
Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead;
The help of one stands me in little stead.
To hazard all our lives in one small boat.
If I today die not with Frenchmen's rage,
Tomorrow I shall die with mickle age.
By me they nothing gain, and, if I stay,
In thee thy mother dies, our household's name,
My death's revenge, thy youth, and England's fame.
All these and more we hazard by thy stay;
All these are saved if thou wilt fly away.
The sword of Orleance hath not made me smart;
These words of yours draw lifeblood from my heart.
On that advantage, bought with such a shame,
To save a paltry life and slay bright fame,
Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly,
The coward horse that bears me fall and die!
And like me to the peasant boys of France,
To be shame's scorn and subject of mischance!
Surely, by all the glory you have won,
An if I fly, I am not Talbot's son.
Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot;
If son to Talbot, die at Talbot's foot.
Then follow thou thy desp'rate sire of Crete,
Thou Icarus; thy life to me is sweet.
If thou wilt fight, fight by thy father's side,
And commendable proved, let's die in pride.
Where is my other life? Mine own is gone.
Triumphant Death, smeared with captivity,
Young Talbot's valor makes me smile at thee.
When he perceived me shrink and on my knee,
His bloody sword he brandished over me,
And like a hungry lion did commence
Rough deeds of rage and stern impatience;
But when my angry guardant stood alone,
Tend'ring my ruin and assailed of none,
Dizzy-eyed fury and great rage of heart
Suddenly made him from my side to start
Into the clust'ring battle of the French;
And in that sea of blood, my boy did drench
His over-mounting spirit; and there died
My Icarus, my blossom, in his pride.
Thou antic Death, which laugh'st us here to scorn,
Anon from thy insulting tyranny,
Coupled in bonds of perpetuity,
Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky,
In thy despite shall scape mortality.--
Speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath!
Brave Death by speaking, whither he will or no.
Imagine him a Frenchman and thy foe.--
Poor boy, he smiles, methinks, as who should say
Come, come, and lay him in his father's arms;
My spirit can no longer bear these harms.
Soldiers, adieu! I have what I would have,
Now my old arms are young John Talbot's grave.
Had York and Somerset brought rescue in,
We should have found a bloody day of this.
How the young whelp of Talbot's, raging wood,
Did flesh his puny sword in Frenchmen's blood!
Once I encountered him, and thus I said:
But with a proud majestical high scorn
He answered thus: "Young Talbot was not born
To be the pillage of a giglot wench."
So, rushing in the bowels of the French,
He left me proudly, as unworthy fight.
Doubtless he would have made a noble knight.
See where he lies inhearsed in the arms
Of the most bloody nurser of his harms.
Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunder,
Whose life was England's glory, Gallia's wonder.
During the life, let us not wrong it dead.
Herald, conduct me to the Dauphin's tent,
To know who hath obtained the glory of the day.
On what submissive message art thou sent?
Submission, dauphin? 'Tis a mere French word.
We English warriors wot not what it means.
And to survey the bodies of the dead.
For prisoners askst thou? Hell our prison is.
But tell me whom thou seek'st.
But where's the great Alcides of the field,
Valiant Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury,
Created for his rare success in arms
Great Earl of Washford, Waterford, and Valence,
Lord Talbot of Goodrich and Urchinfield,
Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdon of Alton,
Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Furnival of
Sheffield,
The thrice victorious Lord of Falconbridge,
Knight of the noble Order of Saint George,
Worthy Saint Michael, and the Golden Fleece,
Great Marshal to Henry the Sixth
Of all his wars within the realm of France?
Here's a silly stately style indeed.
The Turk, that two-and-fifty kingdoms hath,
Writes not so tedious a style as this.
Him that thou magnifi'st with all these titles
Stinking and flyblown lies here at our feet.
Is Talbot slain, the Frenchmen's only scourge,
Your kingdom's terror and black Nemesis?
That I in rage might shoot them at your faces!
It were enough to fright the realm of France.
Were but his picture left amongst you here,
It would amaze the proudest of you all.
Give me their bodies, that I may bear them hence
And give them burial as beseems their worth.
He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit.
For God's sake, let him have him. To keep them here,
They would but stink and putrefy the air.
Go, take their bodies hence.
But from their ashes shall be reared
So we be rid of them, do with him what thou wilt.
And now to Paris in this conquering vein.
All will be ours, now bloody Talbot's slain.
Have you perused the letters from the Pope,
The Emperor, and the Earl of Armagnac?
They humbly sue unto your Excellence
To have a godly peace concluded of
Between the realms of England and of France.
How doth your Grace affect their motion?
Well, my good lord, and as the only means
To stop effusion of our Christian blood
And stablish quietness on every side.
Ay, marry, uncle, for I always thought
It was both impious and unnatural
That such immanity and bloody strife
Should reign among professors of one faith.
Besides, my lord, the sooner to effect
And surer bind this knot of amity,
The Earl of Armagnac, near knit to Charles,
Proffers his only daughter to your Grace
In marriage, with a large and sumptuous dowry.
Marriage, uncle? Alas, my years are young;
And fitter is my study and my books
Than wanton dalliance with a paramour.
Yet call th' Ambassadors and, as you please,
So let them have their answers every one.
Tends to God's glory and my country's weal.
What, is my Lord of Winchester installed
And called unto a cardinal's degree?
Then I perceive that will be verified
Henry the Fifth did sometime prophesy:
He'll make his cap coequal with the crown."
My Lords Ambassadors, your several suits
Have been considered and debated on;
Your purpose is both good and reasonable,
And therefore are we certainly resolved
To draw conditions of a friendly peace,
Which by my Lord of Winchester we mean
Shall be transported presently to France.
And for the proffer of my lord your master,
As, liking of the lady's virtuous gifts,
Her beauty, and the value of her dower,
He doth intend she shall be England's queen.
In argument and proof of which contract,
Bear her this jewel, pledge of my affection.--
And so, my Lord Protector, see them guarded
And safely brought to Dover, where, inshipped,
Commit them to the fortune of the sea.
Stay, my Lord Legate; you shall first receive
The sum of money which I promised
Should be delivered to his Holiness
For clothing me in these grave ornaments.
Now Winchester will not submit, I trow,
Or be inferior to the proudest peer.
Humphrey of Gloucester, thou shalt well perceive
That neither in birth or for authority
The Bishop will be overborne by thee.
Or sack this country with a mutiny.
Reignier, and Joan la Pucelle, with Soldiers.]
These news, my lords, may cheer our drooping spirits:
And turn again unto the warlike French.
Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France,
And keep not back your powers in dalliance.
Peace be amongst them if they turn to us;
Else ruin combat with their palaces!
Success unto our valiant general,
And happiness to his accomplices.
What tidings send our scouts? I prithee speak.
The English army that divided was
Into two parties is now conjoined in one,
And means to give you battle presently.
Somewhat too sudden, sirs, the warning is,
But we will presently provide for them.
Now he is gone, my lord, you need not fear.
Of all base passions, fear is most accursed.
Command the conquest, Charles, it shall be thine;
Let Henry fret and all the world repine.
Then on, my lords, and France be fortunate!
The Regent conquers and the Frenchmen fly.
Now help, you charming spells and periapts,
And you choice spirits that admonish me,
And give me signs of future accidents.	
You speedy helpers, that are substitutes
Under the lordly monarch of the north,
Appear, and aid me in this enterprise.
This speed and quick appearance argues proof
Of your accustomed diligence to me.
Now, you familiar spirits that are culled
Out of the powerful regions under earth,
Help me this once, that France may get the field.
Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,
In earnest of a further benefit,
So you do condescend to help me now.
No hope to have redress? My body shall
Pay recompense if you will grant my suit.
Cannot my body nor blood-sacrifice
Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?
Then take my soul--my body, soul, and all--
Before that England give the French the foil.
See, they forsake me. Now the time is come
That France must vail her lofty-plumed crest
And let her head fall into England's lap.
My ancient incantations are too weak,
And hell too strong for me to buckle with.
Now, France, thy glory droopeth to the dust.
Burgundy and the French fly as York and English
Damsel of France, I think I have you fast.
Unchain your spirits now with spelling charms,
And try if they can gain your liberty.
See how the ugly witch doth bend her brows
As if with Circe she would change my shape.
Changed to a worser shape thou canst not be.
No shape but his can please your dainty eye.
And may you both be suddenly surprised
By bloody hands in sleeping on your beds!
Fell banning hag! Enchantress, hold thy tongue.
Curse, miscreant, when thou com'st to the stake.
Be what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner.
For I will touch thee but with reverent hands.
And lay them gently on thy tender side.
Who art thou? Say, that I may honor thee.
Margaret my name, and daughter to a king,
The King of Naples, whosoe'er thou art.
An earl I am, and Suffolk am I called.
Be not offended, nature's miracle;
Thou art allotted to be ta'en by me.
So doth the swan her downy cygnets save,
Keeping them prisoner underneath her wings.
Yet if this servile usage once offend,
Go and be free again as Suffolk's friend.
My hand would free her, but my heart says no.
As plays the sun upon the glassy streams,
Twinkling another counterfeited beam,
So seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes.
Fain would I woo her, yet I dare not speak.
Fie, de la Pole, disable not thyself!
Hast not a tongue? Is she not here?
Wilt thou be daunted at a woman's sight?
Ay. Beauty's princely majesty is such
Confounds the tongue and makes the senses rough.
Say, Earl of Suffolk, if thy name be so,
What ransom must I pay before I pass?
For I perceive I am thy prisoner.
How canst thou tell she will deny thy suit
Before thou make a trial of her love?
Why speak'st thou not? What ransom must I pay?
She's beautiful, and therefore to be wooed;
She is a woman, therefore to be won.
Wilt thou accept of ransom, yea or no?
Fond man, remember that thou hast a wife;
Then how can Margaret be thy paramour?
There all is marred; there lies a cooling card.
He talks at random; sure the man is mad.
And yet a dispensation may be had.
And yet I would that you would answer me.
Why, for my king. Tush, that's a wooden thing!
He talks of wood. It is some carpenter.
Yet so my fancy may be satisfied,
And peace established between these realms.
But there remains a scruple in that, too;
For though her father be the King of Naples,
Duke of Anjou and Maine, yet is he poor,
And our nobility will scorn the match.
Hear you, captain? Are you not at leisure?
It shall be so, disdain they ne'er so much.
Henry is youthful, and will quickly yield.--
Madam, I have a secret to reveal.
What though I be enthralled, he seems a knight,
And will not any way dishonor me.
Lady, vouchsafe to listen what I say.
Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French,
And then I need not crave his courtesy.
Sweet madam, give me hearing in a cause.
Tush, women have been captivate ere now.
Lady, wherefore talk you so?
Say, gentle princess, would you not suppose
Your bondage happy, to be made a queen?
To be a queen in bondage is more vile
Than is a slave in base servility,
For princes should be free.
If happy England's royal king be free.
Why, what concerns his freedom unto me?
To put a golden scepter in thy hand
And set a precious crown upon thy head,
If thou wilt condescend to be my--
No, gentle madam, I unworthy am
To woo so fair a dame to be his wife,
And have no portion in the choice myself.
How say you, madam? Are you so content?
An if my father please, I am content.
Then call our captains and our colors forth!
And, madam, at your father's castle walls
We'll crave a parley to confer with him.
See, Reignier, see thy daughter prisoner!
To whom?
Or to exclaim on Fortune's fickleness.
Yes, there is remedy enough, my lord:
Consent, and, for thy Honor give consent,
Thy daughter shall be wedded to my king,
Whom I with pain have wooed and won thereto;
And this her easy-held imprisonment
Hath gained thy daughter princely liberty.
Speaks Suffolk as he thinks?
That Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or feign.
Upon thy princely warrant, I descend
To give thee answer of thy just demand.
And here I will expect thy coming.
Welcome, brave earl, into our territories.
Command in Anjou what your Honor pleases.
Thanks, Reignier, happy for so sweet a child,
Fit to be made companion with a king.
What answer makes your Grace unto my suit?
Since thou dost deign to woo her little worth
To be the princely bride of such a lord,
Upon condition I may quietly
Enjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou,
Free from oppression or the stroke of war,
My daughter shall be Henry's, if he please.
That is her ransom; I deliver her,
And those two counties I will undertake
Your Grace shall well and quietly enjoy.
And I, again in Henry's royal name
As deputy unto that gracious king,
Give thee her hand for sign of plighted faith.
Reignier of France, I give thee kingly thanks
Because this is in traffic of a king.
To be mine own attorney in this case.--
And make this marriage to be solemnized.
So farewell, Reignier; set this diamond safe
In golden palaces, as it becomes.
The Christian prince King Henry, were he here.
Farewell, my lord; good wishes, praise, and prayers
Shall Suffolk ever have of Margaret.
Farewell, sweet madam. But, hark you, Margaret,
No princely commendations to my king?
Such commendations as becomes a maid,
Words sweetly placed and modestly directed.
But, madam, I must trouble you again:
No loving token to his Majesty?
Yes, my good lord: a pure unspotted heart,
Never yet taint with love, I send the King.
That for thyself. I will not so presume
To send such peevish tokens to a king.	
Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth.
There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk.
Solicit Henry with her wondrous praise;
Bethink thee on her virtues that surmount
And natural graces that extinguish art;
Repeat their semblance often on the seas,
That, when thou com'st to kneel at Henry's feet,
Thou mayst bereave him of his wits with wonder.
Bring forth that sorceress condemned to burn.
Ah, Joan, this kills thy father's heart outright.
Have I sought every country far and near,
And, now it is my chance to find thee out,
Must I behold thy timeless cruel death?
Ah, Joan, sweet daughter Joan, I'll die with thee.
Decrepit miser, base ignoble wretch!
Thou art no father nor no friend of mine.
Out, out!--My lords, an please you, 'tis not so!
Her mother liveth yet, can testify
She was the first fruit of my bach'lorship.
Graceless, wilt thou deny thy parentage?
This argues what her kind of life hath been,
Wicked and vile; and so her death concludes.
Fie, Joan, that thou wilt be so obstacle!
God knows thou art a collop of my flesh,
And for thy sake have I shed many a tear.
Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Joan.
Peasant, avaunt!--You have suborned this man
Of purpose to obscure my noble birth.
The morn that I was wedded to her mother.--
Kneel down and take my blessing, good my girl.
Wilt thou not stoop? Now cursed be the time
Of thy nativity! I would the milk
Thy mother gave thee when thou suck'dst her
Had been a little ratsbane for thy sake!
Or else, when thou didst keep my lambs afield,
Dost thou deny thy father, cursed drab?
Take her away, for she hath lived too long
To fill the world with vicious qualities.
First, let me tell you whom you have condemned:
Not one begotten of a shepherd swain,
But issued from the progeny of kings,
Virtuous and holy, chosen from above
By inspiration of celestial grace
To work exceeding miracles on earth.
But you, that are polluted with your lusts,
Stained with the guiltless blood of innocents,
Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices,
Because you want the grace that others have,
You judge it straight a thing impossible
To compass wonders but by help of devils.
No, misconceived! Joan of Arc hath been
Chaste and immaculate in very thought,
Whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effused,
Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.
Ay, ay.--Away with her to execution.
And hark you, sirs: because she is a maid,
Spare for no faggots; let there be enow.
Place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake
That so her torture may be shortened.
Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts?
Then, Joan, discover thine infirmity,
That warranteth by law to be thy privilege:
Murder not then the fruit within my womb,
Although you hale me to a violent death.
Now heaven forfend, the holy maid with child?
The greatest miracle that e'er you wrought!
Is all your strict preciseness come to this?
She and the Dauphin have been juggling.
Well, go to, we'll have no bastards live,
Especially since Charles must father it.
You are deceived; my child is none of his.
It was Alanson that enjoyed my love.
Alanson, that notorious Machiavel?
It dies an if it had a thousand lives!
But Reignier, King of Naples, that prevailed.
Why, here's a girl! I think she knows not well--
There were so many--whom she may accuse.
It's sign she hath been liberal and free.
And yet, forsooth, she is a virgin pure!--
Strumpet, thy words condemn thy brat and thee.
Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.
Then lead me hence, with whom I leave my curse:
May never glorious sun reflex his beams
Upon the country where you make abode,
But darkness and the gloomy shade of death
Environ you, till mischief and despair
Drive you to break your necks or hang yourselves.
Break thou in pieces, and consume to ashes,
Thou foul accursed minister of hell!
Lord Regent, I do greet your Excellence
With letters of commission from the King.
For know, my lords, the states of Christendom,
Moved with remorse of these outrageous broils,
Have earnestly implored a general peace
Betwixt our nation and the aspiring French;
And here at hand the Dauphin and his train
Approacheth to confer about some matter.
Is all our travail turned to this effect?
After the slaughter of so many peers,
So many captains, gentlemen, and soldiers
That in this quarrel have been overthrown
And sold their bodies for their country's benefit,
Shall we at last conclude effeminate peace?
Have we not lost most part of all the towns--
By treason, falsehood, and by treachery--
Our great progenitors had conquered?
The utter loss of all the realm of France!
Be patient, York; if we conclude a peace
It shall be with such strict and severe covenants
As little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.
Reignier, with Attendants.]
Since, lords of England, it is thus agreed
That peaceful truce shall be proclaimed in France,
We come to be informed by yourselves
What the conditions of that league must be.
Speak, Winchester, for boiling choler chokes
The hollow passage of my poisoned voice
By sight of these our baleful enemies.
Charles and the rest, it is enacted thus:
That, in regard King Henry gives consent,
Of mere compassion and of lenity,
To ease your country of distressful war
And suffer you to breathe in fruitful peace,
You shall become true liegemen to his crown.
And, Charles, upon condition thou wilt swear
To pay him tribute and submit thyself,
Thou shalt be placed as viceroy under him,
And still enjoy thy regal dignity.
Must he be then as shadow of himself--
Adorn his temples with a coronet,
And yet, in substance and authority,
Retain but privilege of a private man?
This proffer is absurd and reasonless.
With more than half the Gallian territories,
And therein reverenced for their lawful king.
Shall I, for lucre of the rest unvanquished,
Detract so much from that prerogative
As to be called but viceroy of the whole?
No, lord ambassador, I'll rather keep
That which I have than, coveting for more,
Be cast from possibility of all.
Insulting Charles, hast thou by secret means
Used intercession to obtain a league
And, now the matter grows to compromise,
Stand'st thou aloof upon comparison?
Either accept the title thou usurp'st,
Of benefit proceeding from our king
And not of any challenge of desert,
Or we will plague thee with incessant wars.
My lord, you do not well in obstinacy
To cavil in the course of this contract.
If once it be neglected, ten to one
We shall not find like opportunity.
To say the truth, it is your policy
To save your subjects from such massacre
And ruthless slaughters as are daily seen
By our proceeding in hostility;
And therefore take this compact of a truce
Although you break it when your pleasure serves.
How say'st thou, Charles? Shall our condition stand?
It shall--only reserved you claim no interest
In any of our towns of garrison.
Then swear allegiance to his Majesty,
As thou art knight, never to disobey
Nor be rebellious to the crown of England,
Thou nor thy nobles, to the crown of England.
So, now dismiss your army when you please;
Hang up your ensigns, let your drums be still,
For here we entertain a solemn peace.
Gloucester, and Exeter, with Attendants.]
Your wondrous rare description, noble earl,
Of beauteous Margaret hath astonished me.
Her virtues graced with external gifts
Do breed love's settled passions in my heart,
And like as rigor of tempestuous gusts
Provokes the mightiest hulk against the tide,
So am I driven by breath of her renown
Either to suffer shipwrack, or arrive
Where I may have fruition of her love.
Tush, my good lord, this superficial tale
Is but a preface of her worthy praise.
The chief perfections of that lovely dame,
Had I sufficient skill to utter them,
Would make a volume of enticing lines
Able to ravish any dull conceit;
And, which is more, she is not so divine,
So full replete with choice of all delights,
But with as humble lowliness of mind
She is content to be at your command--
Command, I mean, of virtuous chaste intents--
To love and honor Henry as her lord.
And otherwise will Henry ne'er presume.--
Therefore, my Lord Protector, give consent
That Margaret may be England's royal queen.
So should I give consent to flatter sin.
You know, my lord, your Highness is betrothed
Unto another lady of esteem.
How shall we then dispense with that contract
And not deface your honor with reproach?
As doth a ruler with unlawful oaths;
Or one that, at a triumph having vowed
To try his strength, forsaketh yet the lists
By reason of his adversary's odds.
And therefore may be broke without offense.
Why, what, I pray, is Margaret more than that?
Her father is no better than an earl,
Although in glorious titles he excel.
Yes, my lord, her father is a king,
The King of Naples and Jerusalem,
And of such great authority in France
As his alliance will confirm our peace,
And keep the Frenchmen in allegiance.
And so the Earl of Armagnac may do,
Because he is near kinsman unto Charles.
Besides, his wealth doth warrant a liberal dower,
Where Reignier sooner will receive than give.
That he should be so abject, base, and poor,
To choose for wealth and not for perfect love.
Henry is able to enrich his queen,
And not to seek a queen to make him rich;
So worthless peasants bargain for their wives,
As market men for oxen, sheep, or horse.
Marriage is a matter of more worth
Than to be dealt in by attorneyship.
Not whom we will, but whom his Grace affects,
Must be companion of his nuptial bed.
And therefore, lords, since he affects her most,
Most of all these reasons bindeth us
In our opinions she should be preferred.
For what is wedlock forced but a hell,
An age of discord and continual strife?
Whereas the contrary bringeth bliss
And is a pattern of celestial peace.
Whom should we match with Henry, being a king,
But Margaret, that is daughter to a king?
Her peerless feature, joined with her birth,
Approves her fit for none but for a king.
Her valiant courage and undaunted spirit,
More than in women commonly is seen,
Will answer our hope in issue of a king.
For Henry, son unto a conqueror,
Is likely to beget more conquerors,
If with a lady of so high resolve
As is fair Margaret he be linked in love.
Then yield, my lords, and here conclude with me
That Margaret shall be queen, and none but she.
Whether it be through force of your report,
My noble Lord of Suffolk, or for that
My tender youth was never yet attaint
With any passion of inflaming love,
Such fierce alarums both of hope and fear,
As I am sick with working of my thoughts.
Take therefore shipping; post, my lord, to France;
Agree to any covenants, and procure
That Lady Margaret do vouchsafe to come
To cross the seas to England and be crowned
King Henry's faithful and anointed queen.
For your expenses and sufficient charge,
Among the people gather up a tenth.
Be gone, I say, for till you do return,
And you, good uncle, banish all offense.
If you do censure me by what you were,
Not what you are, I know it will excuse
This sudden execution of my will.
And so conduct me where, from company,
Ay, grief, I fear me, both at first and last.
Thus Suffolk hath prevailed, and thus he goes
As did the youthful Paris once to Greece,
With hope to find the like event in love,
But prosper better than the Trojan did.
Margaret shall now be queen, and rule the King,
But I will rule both her, the King, and realm.
Tush, never tell me! I take it much unkindly
That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse
As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.
If ever I did dream of such a matter,
Abhor me.
Thou toldst me thou didst hold him in thy hate.
If I do not. Three great ones of the city,
In personal suit to make me his lieutenant,
Off-capped to him; and, by the faith of man,
But he, as loving his own pride and purposes,
Evades them with a bombast circumstance,
Horribly stuffed with epithets of war,
And in conclusion,
Nonsuits my mediators. For "Certes," says he,
And what was he?
Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
One Michael Cassio, a Florentine,
That never set a squadron in the field,
Nor the division of a battle knows
More than a spinster--unless the bookish theoric,
Wherein the toged consuls can propose
As masterly as he. Mere prattle without practice
Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had th' election;
And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds
Christened and heathen, must be beleed and
By debitor and creditor. This countercaster,
He, in good time, must his lieutenant be,
And I, God bless the mark, his Moorship's ancient.
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.
Why, there's no remedy. 'Tis the curse of service.
Preferment goes by letter and affection,
And not by old gradation, where each second
Stood heir to th' first. Now, sir, be judge yourself
Whether I in any just term am affined
To love the Moor.
We cannot all be masters, nor all masters
Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark
Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave
That, doting on his own obsequious bondage,
Wears out his time, much like his master's ass,
For naught but provender, and when he's old,
Whip me such honest knaves! Others there are
Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty,
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
And, throwing but shows of service on their lords,
Do well thrive by them; and when they have lined
Do themselves homage. These fellows have some
And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir,
It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
Were I the Moor I would not be Iago.
In following him, I follow but myself.
Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
But seeming so for my peculiar end.
For when my outward action doth demonstrate
The native act and figure of my heart
In complement extern, 'tis not long after
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to peck at. I am not what I am.
What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe
If he can carry 't thus!
Rouse him. Make after him, poison his delight,
Proclaim him in the streets; incense her kinsmen,
And, though he in a fertile climate dwell,
Plague him with flies. Though that his joy be joy,
Yet throw such chances of vexation on 't
As it may lose some color.
Here is her father's house. I'll call aloud.
Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell
As when, by night and negligence, the fire
Is spied in populous cities.
What ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!
Awake! What ho, Brabantio! Thieves, thieves!
Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!
Thieves, thieves!
What is the reason of this terrible summons?
What is the matter there?
Signior, is all your family within?
Are your doors locked?
Zounds, sir, you're robbed. For shame, put on your
Your heart is burst. You have lost half your soul.
Even now, now, very now, an old black ram
Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise!
Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,
Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you.
Arise, I say!
Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?
My name is Roderigo.
In honest plainness thou hast heard me say
My daughter is not for thee. And now in madness,
Being full of supper and distemp'ring draughts,
Upon malicious bravery dost thou come
To start my quiet.
My spirit and my place have in them power
To make this bitter to thee.
Patience, good sir.
This is Venice. My house is not a grange.
In simple and pure soul I come to you--
This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.
Sir, I will answer anything. But I beseech you,
If 't be your pleasure and most wise consent--
As partly I find it is--that your fair daughter,
At this odd-even and dull watch o' th' night,
Transported with no worse nor better guard
But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,
To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor:
If this be known to you, and your allowance,
We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs.
But if you know not this, my manners tell me
We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe
That from the sense of all civility
Your daughter, if you have not given her leave,
Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
In an extravagant and wheeling stranger
Of here and everywhere. Straight satisfy yourself.
If she be in her chamber or your house,
Let loose on me the justice of the state
For thus deluding you.
Give me a taper. Call up all my people.
This accident is not unlike my dream.
Belief of it oppresses me already.
Light, I say, light!	
It seems not meet nor wholesome to my place
To be producted, as if I stay I shall,
Against the Moor. For I do know the state,
However this may gall him with some check,
Cannot with safety cast him, for he's embarked
With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars,
Which even now stands in act, that, for their souls,
Another of his fathom they have none
To lead their business. In which regard,
Though I do hate him as I do hell pains,
Yet, for necessity of present life,
Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find
Lead to the Sagittary the raised search,
And there will I be with him. So, farewell.	
Torches.]
It is too true an evil. Gone she is,
And what's to come of my despised time
Is naught but bitterness.--Now, Roderigo,
Where didst thou see her?--O, unhappy girl!--
With the Moor, sayst thou?--Who would be a
How didst thou know 'twas she?--O, she deceives
Past thought!--What said she to you?--Get more
Raise all my kindred.--Are they married, think
Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds
By what you see them act.--Is there not charms
By which the property of youth and maidhood
May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
Of some such thing?
Call up my brother.--O, would you had had her!--
Some one way, some another.--Do you know
Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?
To get good guard and go along with me.
Pray you lead on. At every house I'll call.
And raise some special officers of night.--
On, good Roderigo. I will deserve your pains.
Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
Yet do I hold it very stuff o' th' conscience
To do no contrived murder. I lack iniquity
Sometimes to do me service. Nine or ten times
And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms
Against your Honor,
That with the little godliness I have
Are you fast married? Be assured of this,
That the magnifico is much beloved,
And hath in his effect a voice potential
As double as the Duke's. He will divorce you
Or put upon you what restraint or grievance
The law 
Will give him cable.
My services which I have done the signiory
Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know
From men of royal siege, and my demerits
May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune
As this that I have reached. For know, Iago,
But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
Put into circumscription and confine
For the sea's worth. But look, what lights come
Those are the raised father and his friends.
You were best go in.
My parts, my title, and my perfect soul
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
The servants of the Duke and my lieutenant!
The goodness of the night upon you, friends.
What is the news?
And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance,
Even on the instant.
Something from Cyprus, as I may divine.
It is a business of some heat. The galleys
Have sent a dozen sequent messengers
This very night at one another's heels,
And many of the Consuls, raised and met,
Are at the Duke's already. You have been hotly
When, being not at your lodging to be found,
The Senate hath sent about three several quests
To search you out.
And go with you.	
Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carrack.
If it prove lawful prize, he's made forever.
Marry, to--
Come, captain, will you go?
Here comes another troop to seek for you.
It is Brabantio. General, be advised,
He comes to bad intent.
Signior, it is the Moor.
You, Roderigo! Come, sir, I am for you.
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust
Good signior, you shall more command with years
Than with your weapons.
Damned as thou art, thou hast enchanted her!
For I'll refer me to all things of sense,
If she in chains of magic were not bound,
Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,
So opposite to marriage that she shunned
The wealthy curled darlings of our nation,
Would ever have, t' incur a general mock,
Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
Of such a thing as thou--to fear, not to delight!
Judge me the world, if 'tis not gross in sense
That thou hast practiced on her with foul charms,
Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals
That weakens motion. I'll have 't disputed on.
For an abuser of the world, a practicer
Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.--
Lay hold upon him. If he do resist,
Subdue him at his peril.
Both you of my inclining and the rest.
Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it
Without a prompter.--Whither will you that I go
To answer this your charge?
Of law and course of direct session
Call thee to answer.
How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,
Whose messengers are here about my side,
Upon some present business of the state,
To bring me to him?
The Duke's in council, and your noble self
In this time of the night? Bring him away;
Mine's not an idle cause. The Duke himself,
Or any of my brothers of the state,
Cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own.
For if such actions may have passage free,
Bondslaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.
There's no composition in these news
That gives them credit.
Indeed, they are disproportioned.
My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.
And mine, a hundred forty.
And mine, two hundred.
But though they jump not on a just account
Nay, it is possible enough to judgment.
But the main article I do approve
In fearful sense.
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes.
So was I bid report here to the state
By Signior Angelo.	
How say you by this change?
By no assay of reason. 'Tis a pageant
To keep us in false gaze. When we consider
Th' importancy of Cyprus to the Turk,
And let ourselves again but understand
That, as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
So may he with more facile question bear it,
For that it stands not in such warlike brace,
But altogether lacks th' abilities
That Rhodes is dressed in--if we make thought of
We must not think the Turk is so unskillful
To leave that latest which concerns him first,
Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain
To wake and wage a danger profitless.
Nay, in all confidence, he's not for Rhodes.
The Ottomites, Reverend and Gracious,
Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,
Have there injointed them with an after fleet.
Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?
Of thirty sail; and now they do restem
Their backward course, bearing with frank
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
Your trusty and most valiant servitor,
With his free duty recommends you thus,
And prays you to believe him.	
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?
He's now in Florence.
Post-post-haste. Dispatch.
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.
Officers.]
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
Against the general enemy Ottoman.
We lacked your counsel and your help tonight.
So did I yours. Good your Grace, pardon me.
Neither my place nor aught I heard of business
Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general
Take hold on me, for my particular grief
Is of so floodgate and o'erbearing nature
That it engluts and swallows other sorrows
And it is still itself.
My daughter! O, my daughter!
She is abused, stol'n from me, and corrupted
By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks;
For nature so prepost'rously to err--
Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense--
Sans witchcraft could not.
Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding
Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself
And you of her, the bloody book of law
You shall yourself read in the bitter letter,
After your own sense, yea, though our proper son
Stood in your action.
Here is the man--this Moor, whom now it seems
Your special mandate for the state affairs
Hath hither brought.
What, in your own part, can you say to this?
Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,
My very noble and approved good masters:
That I have ta'en away this old man's daughter,
It is most true; true I have married her.
The very head and front of my offending
Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,
And little blessed with the soft phrase of peace;
For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith,
Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used
Their dearest action in the tented field,
And little of this great world can I speak
More than pertains to feats of broil and battle.
And therefore little shall I grace my cause
In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious
Of my whole course of love--what drugs, what
What conjuration, and what mighty magic
Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion
Blushed at herself. And she, in spite of nature,
Of years, of country, credit, everything,
To fall in love with what she feared to look on!
It is a judgment maimed and most imperfect
That will confess perfection so could err
Against all rules of nature, and must be driven
To find out practices of cunning hell
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again
That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood,
Or with some dram conjured to this effect,
He wrought upon her.
Without more wider and more overt test
Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
Of modern seeming do prefer against him.
Did you by indirect and forced courses
Subdue and poison this young maid's affections?
Or came it by request, and such fair question
As soul to soul affordeth?
Send for the lady to the Sagittary
And let her speak of me before her father.
If you do find me foul in her report,
The trust, the office I do hold of you,
Not only take away, but let your sentence
Even fall upon my life.
Ancient, conduct them. You best know the place.
And till she come, as truly as to heaven
So justly to your grave ears I'll present
How I did thrive in this fair lady's love,
And she in mine.
Her father loved me, oft invited me,
Still questioned me the story of my life
From year to year--the battles, sieges, fortunes
That I have passed.
To th' very moment that he bade me tell it,
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances:
Of moving accidents by flood and field,
Of hairbreadth 'scapes i' th' imminent deadly
Of being taken by the insolent foe
And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence,
And portance in my traveler's history,
Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,
Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads
It was my hint to speak--such was my process--
And of the cannibals that each other eat,
The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
Do grow beneath their shoulders. These things to
Would Desdemona seriously incline.
But still the house affairs would draw her thence,
Which ever as she could with haste dispatch
She'd come again, and with a greedy ear
Devour up my discourse. Which I, observing,
Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
But not intentively. I did consent,
And often did beguile her of her tears
When I did speak of some distressful stroke
That my youth suffered. My story being done,
She gave me for my pains a world of sighs.
She swore, in faith, 'twas strange, 'twas passing
She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished
That heaven had made her such a man. She thanked
And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,
And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake.
She loved me for the dangers I had passed,
And I loved her that she did pity them.
This only is the witchcraft I have used.
Here comes the lady. Let her witness it.
Good Brabantio,
Take up this mangled matter at the best.
Men do their broken weapons rather use
Than their bare hands.
If she confess that she was half the wooer,
Destruction on my head if my bad blame
Light on the man.--Come hither, gentle mistress.
Do you perceive in all this noble company
Where most you owe obedience?
To you I am bound for life and education.
My life and education both do learn me
How to respect you. You are the lord of duty.
And so much duty as my mother showed
To you, preferring you before her father,
So much I challenge that I may profess
Due to the Moor my lord.
Please it your Grace, on to the state affairs.
Come hither, Moor.
Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart
For thy escape would teach me tyranny,
To hang clogs on them.--I have done, my lord.
Let me speak like yourself and lay a sentence,
Which as a grise or step may help these lovers
Into your favor.
When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
To mourn a mischief that is past and gone
Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
What cannot be preserved when fortune takes,
Patience her injury a mock'ry makes.
The robbed that smiles steals something from the
He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.
So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile,
We lose it not so long as we can smile.
He bears the sentence well that nothing bears
But the free comfort which from thence he hears;
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow
That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.
These sentences to sugar or to gall,
Being strong on both sides, are equivocal.
But words are words. I never yet did hear
That the bruised heart was pierced through the
The tyrant custom, most grave senators,
Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war
My thrice-driven bed of down. I do agnize
This present wars against the Ottomites.
Most humbly, therefore, bending to your state,
Due reference of place and exhibition,
With such accommodation and besort
As levels with her breeding.
Why, at her father's.
To put my father in impatient thoughts
By being in his eye. Most gracious duke,
To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear
And let me find a charter in your voice
That I love the Moor to live with him
My downright violence and storm of fortunes
May trumpet to the world. My heart's subdued
Even to the very quality of my lord.
And to his honors and his valiant parts
Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.
So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,
The rites for why I love him are bereft me
And I a heavy interim shall support
By his dear absence. Let me go with him.
Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not
To please the palate of my appetite,
Nor to comply with heat (the young affects
In me defunct) and proper satisfaction,
But to be free and bounteous to her mind.
And heaven defend your good souls that you think
For she is with me. No, when light-winged toys
Of feathered Cupid seel with wanton dullness
My speculative and officed instruments,
That my disports corrupt and taint my business,
Let housewives make a skillet of my helm,
And all indign and base adversities
Make head against my estimation.
Be it as you shall privately determine,
Either for her stay or going. Th' affair cries haste,
And speed must answer it.
You must away tonight.
At nine i' th' morning here we'll meet again.
Othello, leave some officer behind
And he shall our commission bring to you,
With such things else of quality and respect
As doth import you.
To his conveyance I assign my wife,
With what else needful your good Grace shall think
To be sent after me.
Good night to everyone.  And, noble
If virtue no delighted beauty lack,
Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.
Adieu, brave Moor, use Desdemona well.
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see.
She has deceived her father, and may thee.	
My life upon her faith!
Honest Iago,
My Desdemona must I leave to thee.
And bring them after in the best advantage.--
Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour
Of love, of worldly matters, and direction
To spend with thee. We must obey the time.
Follow thou the wars; defeat thy favor with an
The food that to him now is as luscious as locusts
She must change for youth. When she is sated
Therefore, put money in thy purse. If thou wilt
Therefore make money. A pox of drowning thyself!
It is clean out of the way. Seek thou rather to be
Traverse, go, provide thy money. We will have more
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse.
For I mine own gained knowledge should profane
If I would time expend with such a snipe
But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor,
And it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets
But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,
Will do as if for surety. He holds me well.
The better shall my purpose work on him.
Cassio's a proper man. Let me see now:
To get his place and to plume up my will
In double knavery--How? how?--Let's see.
After some time, to abuse Othello's ear
That he is too familiar with his wife.
He hath a person and a smooth dispose
To be suspected, framed to make women false.
The Moor is of a free and open nature
That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,
And will as tenderly be led by th' nose
As asses are.
Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.
What from the cape can you discern at sea?
Nothing at all. It is a high-wrought flood.
Descry a sail.
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land.
If it hath ruffianed so upon the sea,
What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?
For do but stand upon the foaming shore,
The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds,
The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous
Seems to cast water on the burning Bear
And quench the guards of th' ever-fixed pole.
On the enchafed flood.
Be not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned.
It is impossible to bear it out.
The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks
That their designment halts. A noble ship of Venice
Hath seen a grievous wrack and sufferance
On most part of their fleet.
How? Is this true?
Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,
Is come on shore; the Moor himself at sea,
And is in full commission here for Cyprus.
But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort
Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly
And prays the Moor be safe, for they were parted
With foul and violent tempest.
For I have served him, and the man commands
Like a full soldier. Let's to the seaside, ho!
As well to see the vessel that's come in
As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
Even till we make the main and th' aerial blue
An indistinct regard.
For every minute is expectancy
Of more arrivance.
Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle,
That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens
Give him defense against the elements,
For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.
His bark is stoutly timbered, and his pilot
Of very expert and approved allowance;
Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,
Stand in bold cure.
The town is empty; on the brow o' th' sea
Stand ranks of people, and they cry "A sail!"
My hopes do shape him for the Governor.
They do discharge their shot of courtesy.
Our friends, at least.
And give us truth who 'tis that is arrived.
But, good lieutenant, is your general wived?
Most fortunately. He hath achieved a maid
That paragons description and wild fame,
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,
And in th' essential vesture of creation
Does tire the ingener.
How now? Who has put in?
Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
The guttered rocks and congregated sands
As having sense of beauty, do omit
Their mortal natures, letting go safely by
The divine Desdemona.
She that I spake of, our great captain's captain,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
Make love's quick pants in Desdemona's arms,
Give renewed fire to our extincted spirits,
And bring all Cyprus comfort!
The riches of the ship is come on shore!
You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.
Hail to thee, lady, and the grace of heaven,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand
Enwheel thee round.	
What tidings can you tell of my lord?
He is not yet arrived, nor know I aught
But that he's well and will be shortly here.
The great contention of sea and skies
Parted our fellowship.
But hark, a sail!
They give their greeting to the citadel.
This likewise is a friend.
Good ancient, you are welcome. Welcome, mistress.
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
That I extend my manners. 'Tis my breeding
That gives me this bold show of courtesy.
Sir, would she give you so much of her lips
As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,
You would have enough.
Alas, she has no speech!
Marry, before your Ladyship, I grant,
She puts her tongue a little in her heart
And chides with thinking.
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk.
You rise to play, and go to bed to work.
You shall not write my praise.
What wouldst write of me if thou shouldst praise
For I am nothing if not critical.
Come on, assay.--There's one gone to the harbor?
The thing I am by seeming otherwise.--
Come, how wouldst thou praise me?
Well praised! How if she be black and witty?
Worse and worse.
The Moor. I know his trumpet.
It gives me wonder great as my content
To see you here before me. O my soul's joy!
If after every tempest come such calms,
May the winds blow till they have wakened death,
And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas
Olympus high, and duck again as low
As hell's from heaven! If it were now to die,
My soul hath her content so absolute
That not another comfort like to this
Succeeds in unknown fate.
But that our loves and comforts should increase
Even as our days do grow!
It stops me here; it is too much of joy.	
And this, and this, the greatest discords be
That e'er our hearts shall make!
But I'll set down the pegs that make this music,
As honest as I am.
News, friends! Our wars are done. The Turks are
How does my old acquaintance of this isle?--
Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus.
In mine own comforts.--I prithee, good Iago,
Go to the bay and disembark my coffers.
Bring thou the master to the citadel.
He is a good one, and his worthiness
Does challenge much respect.--Come, Desdemona.
Once more, well met at Cyprus.
Mark me with what violence she first loved the
Moor but for bragging and telling her fantastical
When the blood is made dull with the act of sport,
Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath all
They met so near with their lips that their breaths
When these mutualities so marshal the way, hard
Cassio knows you not. I'll not be far from you. Do
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe 't.
That she loves him, 'tis apt and of great credit.
The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,
Is of a constant, loving, noble nature,
And I dare think he'll prove to Desdemona
Not out of absolute lust (though peradventure
But partly led to diet my revenge
For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
Hath leaped into my seat--the thought whereof
Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards,
And nothing can or shall content my soul
Till I am evened with him, wife for wife,
Or, failing so, yet that I put the Moor
At least into a jealousy so strong
That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do,
If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb
Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me
For making him egregiously an ass
And practicing upon his peace and quiet
Even to madness. 'Tis here, but yet confused.
Knavery's plain face is never seen till used.
All offices are open, and there is full
Cyprus and our noble general, Othello!
Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight.
Let's teach ourselves that honorable stop
Not to outsport discretion.
Iago hath direction what to do,
But notwithstanding, with my personal eye
Will I look to 't.
Michael, goodnight. Tomorrow with your earliest
Let me have speech with you.  Come,
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
That profit's yet to come 'tween me and you.--
Goodnight.
Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.
If I can fasten but one cup upon him
With that which he hath drunk tonight already,
He'll be as full of quarrel and offense
As my young mistress' dog. Now my sick fool
Roderigo,
Whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out,
To Desdemona hath tonight caroused
Potations pottle-deep; and he's to watch.
Three else of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits
That hold their honors in a wary distance,
The very elements of this warlike isle,
Have I tonight flustered with flowing cups;
And they watch too. Now, 'mongst this flock of
Am I to put our Cassio in some action
That may offend the isle. But here they come.
If consequence do but approve my dream,
My boat sails freely both with wind and stream.
Servants with wine.]
Some wine, boys!
He gives your Hollander a vomit ere the next
Some wine, ho!
Lieutenant is to be saved before the Ancient. Let's
To th' platform, masters. Come, let's set the watch.
You see this fellow that is gone before?
He's a soldier fit to stand by Caesar
And give direction; and do but see his vice.
The one as long as th' other. 'Tis pity of him.
On some odd time of his infirmity,
Will shake this island.
He'll watch the horologe a double set
If drink rock not his cradle.
The General were put in mind of it.
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio
And looks not on his evils. Is not this true?
And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor
Should hazard such a place as his own second
With one of an engraffed infirmity.
It were an honest action to say so
To the Moor.
To cure him of this evil--	
But hark! What noise?
Away, I say! Go out and cry a mutiny.
Nay, good lieutenant.--God's will, gentlemen!--
Help, ho! Lieutenant--sir--Montano--sir--
Help, masters!--Here's a goodly watch indeed!
Who's that which rings the bell? Diablo, ho!
The town will rise. God's will, lieutenant, hold!
You will be shamed forever.
What is the matter here?
Hold, ho! Lieutenant--sir--Montano--
Have you forgot all sense of place and duty?
Hold! The General speaks to you. Hold, for shame!
Why, how now, ho! From whence ariseth this?
Are we turned Turks, and to ourselves do that
Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl!
He that stirs next to carve for his own rage
Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.
Silence that dreadful bell. It frights the isle
From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?
Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieving,
Speak. Who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.
In quarter and in terms like bride and groom
Divesting them for bed; and then but now,
As if some planet had unwitted men,
Swords out, and tilting one at other's breast,
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
Any beginning to this peevish odds,
And would in action glorious I had lost
Those legs that brought me to a part of it!
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?
Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil.
The gravity and stillness of your youth
The world hath noted. And your name is great
In mouths of wisest censure. What's the matter
That you unlace your reputation thus,
And spend your rich opinion for the name
Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger.
Your officer Iago can inform you,
While I spare speech, which something now offends
Of all that I do know; nor know I aught
By me that's said or done amiss this night,
Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,
And to defend ourselves it be a sin
When violence assails us.
My blood begins my safer guides to rule,
And passion, having my best judgment collied,
Assays to lead the way. Zounds, if I stir,
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
How this foul rout began, who set it on;
And he that is approved in this offense,
Though he had twinned with me, both at a birth,
Shall lose me. What, in a town of war
Yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear,
To manage private and domestic quarrel,
In night, and on the court and guard of safety?
If partially affined, or leagued in office,
Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
Thou art no soldier.
Than it should do offense to Michael Cassio.
Yet I persuade myself, to speak the truth
Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general:
Montano and myself being in speech,
There comes a fellow crying out for help,
And Cassio following him with determined sword
To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause.
Myself the crying fellow did pursue,
Lest by his clamor--as it so fell out--
The town might fall in fright. He, swift of foot,
Outran my purpose, and I returned the rather
For that I heard the clink and fall of swords
And Cassio high in oath, which till tonight
For this was brief--I found them close together
At blow and thrust, even as again they were
When you yourself did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report.
But men are men; the best sometimes forget.
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received
From him that fled some strange indignity
Which patience could not pass.
Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
Making it light to Cassio.--Cassio, I love thee,
But nevermore be officer of mine.
Look if my gentle love be not raised up!
What is the matter, dear?
Come away to bed.  Sir, for your hurts,
Myself will be your surgeon.--Lead him off.
Iago, look with care about the town
And silence those whom this vile brawl
Come, Desdemona. 'Tis the soldier's life
To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
Iago, my reputation!
You are but now cast in his mood--a punishment
What had he done to you?
God, that men should put an enemy in their
Hydra, such an answer would stop them all. To be
And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love you.
And what's he, then, that says I play the villain,
When this advice is free I give and honest,
Probal to thinking, and indeed the course
To win the Moor again? For 'tis most easy
Th' inclining Desdemona to subdue
In any honest suit. She's framed as fruitful
As the free elements. And then for her
To win the Moor--were 't to renounce his baptism,
All seals and symbols of redeemed sin--
His soul is so enfettered to her love
That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
Even as her appetite shall play the god
With his weak function. How am I then a villain
To counsel Cassio to this parallel course
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!
When devils will the blackest sins put on,
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
As I do now. For whiles this honest fool
Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune,
And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
That she repeals him for her body's lust;
And by how much she strives to do him good,
She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
And out of her own goodness make the net
That shall enmesh them all.
How now, Roderigo?
How poor are they that have not patience!
What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
Thou know'st we work by wit and not by witchcraft,
And wit depends on dilatory time.
Dost not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
And thou, by that small hurt, hast cashiered Cassio.
Though other things grow fair against the sun,
Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe.
Content thyself awhile. By th' Mass, 'tis morning!
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.
Retire thee; go where thou art billeted.
Away, I say! Thou shalt know more hereafter.
Nay, get thee gone.	
Two things are to be done.
My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress.
Myself the while to draw the Moor apart
And bring him jump when he may Cassio find
Soliciting his wife. Ay, that's the way.
Dull not device by coldness and delay.
Masters, play here 
Something that's brief; and bid "Good morrow,
Naples, that they speak i' th' nose thus?
General so likes your music that he desires you, for
There's a poor piece of gold for thee. If the gentlewoman
Do, good my friend.	
In happy time, Iago.
Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,
To send in to your wife. My suit to her
Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona
Procure me some access.
And I'll devise a mean to draw the Moor
Out of the way, that your converse and business
May be more free.
Good morrow, good lieutenant. I am sorry
For your displeasure, but all will sure be well.
The General and his wife are talking of it,
And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moor replies
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus
And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom
He might not but refuse you. But he protests he
And needs no other suitor but his likings
To take the safest occasion by the front
To bring you in again.
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of some brief discourse
With Desdemon alone.
To speak your bosom freely.
These letters give, Iago, to the pilot
And by him do my duties to the Senate.
That done, I will be walking on the works.
Repair there to me.
This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see 't?
We wait upon your Lordship.
Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
All my abilities in thy behalf.
Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husband
As if the cause were his.
But I will have my lord and you again
As friendly as you were.
Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
He's never anything but your true servant.
You have known him long; and be you well assured
He shall in strangeness stand no farther off
Than in a politic distance.
That policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breed itself so out of circumstance,
That, I being absent and my place supplied,
My general will forget my love and service.
Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here,
If I do vow a friendship, I'll perform it
To the last article. My lord shall never rest:
His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift;
With Cassio's suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio,
For thy solicitor shall rather die
Than give thy cause away.
Madam, not now. I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purposes.
Ha, I like not that.
Nothing, my lord; or if--I know not what.
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
Cassio, my lord? No, sure, I cannot think it
That he would steal away so guiltylike,
Seeing your coming.
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,
If I have any grace or power to move you,
His present reconciliation take;
For if he be not one that truly loves you,
That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,
That he hath left part of his grief with me
To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.
Not now, sweet Desdemon. Some other time.
But shall 't be shortly?
Shall 't be tonight at supper?
Why then tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn,
On Tuesday noon or night; on Wednesday morn.
Exceed three days. In faith, he's penitent;
And yet his trespass, in our common reason--
Save that, they say, the wars must make example
Out of her best--is not almost a fault
Tell me, Othello. I wonder in my soul
What you would ask me that I should deny,
Or stand so mamm'ring on? What? Michael Cassio,
That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time,
When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,
Hath ta'en your part--to have so much to do
To bring him in! By 'r Lady, I could do much--
Prithee, no more. Let him come when he will;
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit
To your own person. Nay, when I have a suit
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
It shall be full of poise and difficult weight,
And fearful to be granted.
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
To leave me but a little to myself.
Shall I deny you? No. Farewell, my lord.
Farewell, my Desdemona. I'll come to thee straight.
Emilia, come.--Be as your fancies teach you.
Whate'er you be, I am obedient.
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul
But I do love thee! And when I love thee not,
Chaos is come again.
What dost thou say, Iago?
When you wooed my lady, know of your love?
He did, from first to last. Why dost thou ask?
But for a satisfaction of my thought,
No further harm.
Indeed? Ay, indeed! Discern'st thou aught in that?
Is he not honest?
My lord, for aught I know.
As if there were some monster in thy thought
Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean
When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like?
And when I told thee he was of my counsel
In my whole course of wooing, thou cried'st
And didst contract and purse thy brow together
As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
Some horrible conceit. If thou dost love me,
Show me thy thought.
And for I know thou 'rt full of love and honesty
And weigh'st thy words before thou giv'st them
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more.
For such things in a false, disloyal knave
Are tricks of custom; but in a man that's just,
They're close dilations working from the heart
That passion cannot rule.
Or those that be not, would they might seem none!
Why then, I think Cassio's an honest man.
As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of
The worst of words.
Though I am bound to every act of duty,
Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and
As where's that palace whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? Who has that breast so
But some uncleanly apprehensions
Keep leets and law days and in sessions sit
With meditations lawful?
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
If thou but think'st him wronged and mak'st his ear
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess--
As, I confess, it is my nature's plague
To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy
Shapes faults that are not--that your wisdom
From one that so imperfectly conceits
Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble
Out of his scattering and unsure observance.
It were not for your quiet nor your good,
Nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom,
To let you know my thoughts.
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
Who steals my purse steals trash. 'Tis something,
But he that filches from me my good name
Robs me of that which not enriches him
And makes me poor indeed.
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
Nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody.
Ha?
It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock
The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger;
But O, what damned minutes tells he o'er
Who dotes, yet doubts; suspects, yet strongly loves!
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough;
But riches fineless is as poor as winter
To him that ever fears he shall be poor.
Good God, the souls of all my tribe defend
From jealousy!
Think'st thou I'd make a life of jealousy,
To follow still the changes of the moon
With fresh suspicions? No. To be once in doubt
Is once to be resolved. Exchange me for a goat
When I shall turn the business of my soul
To such exsufflicate and blown surmises,
Matching thy inference. 'Tis not to make me jealous
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances well.
Where virtue is, these are more virtuous.
Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt,
For she had eyes, and chose me. No, Iago,
And on the proof, there is no more but this:
Away at once with love or jealousy.
To show the love and duty that I bear you
With franker spirit. Therefore, as I am bound,
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.
Look to your wife; observe her well with Cassio;
Wear your eyes thus, not jealous nor secure.
Out of self-bounty, be abused. Look to 't.
In Venice they do let God see the pranks
They dare not show their husbands. Their best
Is not to leave 't undone, but keep 't unknown.
She did deceive her father, marrying you,
And when she seemed to shake and fear your looks,
She loved them most.
She that, so young, could give out such a seeming,
To seel her father's eyes up close as oak,
He thought 'twas witchcraft! But I am much to
For too much loving you.
Not a jot, not a jot.
Comes from my love. But I do see you're moved.
To grosser issues nor to larger reach
Than to suspicion.
My speech should fall into such vile success
As my thoughts aim not at. Cassio's my worthy
My lord, I see you're moved.
Long live she so! And long live you to think so!
And yet, how nature erring from itself--
Ay, there's the point. As, to be bold with you,
Not to affect many proposed matches
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
Whereto we see in all things nature tends--
Foh! One may smell in such a will most rank,
Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural--
But pardon me--I do not in position
Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear
Her will, recoiling to her better judgment,
May fall to match you with her country forms
And happily repent.
If more thou dost perceive, let me know more.
Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.
Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless
Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.
My lord, I would I might entreat your Honor
To scan this thing no farther. Leave it to time.
Although 'tis fit that Cassio have his place--
For sure he fills it up with great ability--
Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile,
You shall by that perceive him and his means.
Note if your lady strain his entertainment
With any strong or vehement importunity.
Much will be seen in that. In the meantime,
Let me be thought too busy in my fears--
As worthy cause I have to fear I am--
And hold her free, I do beseech your Honor.
This fellow's of exceeding honesty,
And knows all qualities with a learned spirit
Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,
Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,
To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black
And have not those soft parts of conversation
That chamberers have, or for I am declined
Into the vale of years--yet that's not much--
She's gone, I am abused, and my relief
Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,
That we can call these delicate creatures ours
And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad
And live upon the vapor of a dungeon
Than keep a corner in the thing I love
For others' uses. Yet 'tis the plague of great ones;
Prerogatived are they less than the base.
Even then this forked plague is fated to us
When we do quicken. Look where she comes.
If she be false, heaven mocks itself!
Your dinner, and the generous islanders
By you invited, do attend your presence.
Why do you speak so faintly? Are you not well?
Faith, that's with watching. 'Twill away again.
Let me but bind it hard; within this hour
It will be well.
Let it alone.	
Come, I'll go in with you.
This was her first remembrance from the Moor.
My wayward husband hath a hundred times
Wooed me to steal it. But she so loves the token
That she reserves it evermore about her
To kiss and talk to. I'll have the work ta'en out
And give 't Iago. What he will do with it
Heaven knows, not I.
Do not you chide. I have a thing for you.
You have a thing for me? It is a common thing--
For that same handkerchief?
Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona,
That which so often you did bid me steal.
No, faith, she let it drop by negligence,
And to th' advantage I, being here, took 't up.
Look, here 'tis.
What will you do with 't, that you have been so
To have me filch it?
If it be not for some purpose of import,
Give 't me again. Poor lady, she'll run mad
When she shall lack it.
And let him find it. Trifles light as air
Are to the jealous confirmations strong
As proofs of holy writ. This may do something.
The Moor already changes with my poison;
Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
But with a little act upon the blood
Burn like the mines of sulfur.
Look where he comes. Not poppy nor mandragora
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
Which thou owedst yesterday.
Why, how now, general? No more of that!
Avaunt! Begone! Thou hast set me on the rack.
Than but to know 't a little.
What sense had I of her stol'n hours of lust?
He that is robbed, not wanting what is stol'n,
Let him not know 't, and he's not robbed at all.
Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body,
So I had nothing known. O, now, forever
Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content!
Farewell the plumed troops and the big wars
That makes ambition virtue! O, farewell!
Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,
The spirit-stirring drum, th' ear-piercing fife,
The royal banner, and all quality,
Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war!
And O you mortal engines, whose rude throats
Th' immortal Jove's dread clamors counterfeit,
Farewell! Othello's occupation's gone!
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore!
Be sure of it. Give me the ocular proof,
Or, by the worth of mine eternal soul,
Thou hadst been better have been born a dog
Than answer my waked wrath.
Make me to see 't, or at the least so prove it
That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
To hang a doubt on, or woe upon thy life!
If thou dost slander her and torture me,
Never pray more. Abandon all remorse;
On horror's head horrors accumulate;
Do deeds to make heaven weep, all Earth amazed;
For nothing canst thou to damnation add
Greater than that.
Are you a man? Have you a soul or sense?
God b' wi' you. Take mine office.--O wretched fool,
That liv'st to make thine honesty a vice!--
To be direct and honest is not safe.--
And loses that it works for.
As Dian's visage, is now begrimed and black
As mine own face. If there be cords, or knives,
Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams,
You would be satisfied?
And may; but how? How satisfied, my lord?
Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on,
Behold her topped?
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then
If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
More than their own! What then? How then?
What shall I say? Where's satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this,
Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
As ignorance made drunk. But yet I say,
If imputation and strong circumstances
Which lead directly to the door of truth
Will give you satisfaction, you might have 't.
Give me a living reason she's disloyal.
But sith I am entered in this cause so far,
Pricked to 't by foolish honesty and love,
And being troubled with a raging tooth
So loose of soul that in their sleeps will mutter
Their affairs. One of this kind is Cassio.
In sleep I heard him say "Sweet Desdemona,
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves."
And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
Cry "O sweet creature!" then kiss me hard,
As if he plucked up kisses by the roots
That grew upon my lips; then laid his leg
Cried "Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!"
But this denoted a foregone conclusion.
And this may help to thicken other proofs
That do demonstrate thinly.
Nay, but be wise. Yet we see nothing done.
She may be honest yet. Tell me but this:
Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
Spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand?
See Cassio wipe his beard with.
If it be that, or any that was hers,
It speaks against her with the other proofs.
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.
Now do I see 'tis true. Look here, Iago,
All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven.
Arise, black vengeance, from the hollow hell!
Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne
To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
For 'tis of aspics' tongues!
Patience, I say. Your mind perhaps may change.
Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea,
Whose icy current and compulsive course
Ne'er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on
To the Propontic and the Hellespont,
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace
Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love,
Till that a capable and wide revenge
Swallow them up.  Now by yond marble
In the due reverence of a sacred vow,
Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
You elements that clip us round about,
Witness that here Iago doth give up
The execution of his wit, hands, heart
To wronged Othello's service! Let him command,
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
What bloody business ever.	
Not with vain thanks but with acceptance
And will upon the instant put thee to 't.
Within these three days let me hear thee say
That Cassio's not alive.
Come, go with me apart. I will withdraw
To furnish me with some swift means of death
For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.
Cassio lies?
Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
Full of crusadoes. And but my noble Moor
Is true of mind and made of no such baseness
As jealous creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill thinking.
Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
Drew all such humors from him.
Be called to him.--How is 't with you, my lord?
Well, my good lady.  O, hardness to
How do you, Desdemona?
Give me your hand.  This hand
It yet has felt no age nor known no sorrow.
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart.
Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires
Much castigation, exercise devout;
For here's a young and sweating devil here
That commonly rebels. 'Tis a good hand,
For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.
But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.
Lend me thy handkerchief.
That which I gave you.
Did an Egyptian to my mother give.
She was a charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept
Entirely to her love. But if she lost it,
Or made a gift of it, my father's eye
Should hold her loathed, and his spirits should hunt
After new fancies. She, dying, gave it me,
And bid me, when my fate would have me wived,
To give it her. I did so; and take heed on 't,
Make it a darling like your precious eye.
To lose 't or give 't away were such perdition
As nothing else could match.
The sun to course two hundred compasses,
In her prophetic fury sewed the work.
The worms were hallowed that did breed the silk,
And it was dyed in mummy, which the skillful
Conserved of maidens' hearts.
Most veritable. Therefore, look to 't well.
Then would to God that I had never seen 't!
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?
Is 't lost? Is 't gone? Speak, is 't out o' th' way?
It is not lost, but what an if it were?
Why, so I can. But I will not now.
This is a trick to put me from my suit.
Pray you, let Cassio be received again.
Fetch me the handkerchief!  My mind
You'll never meet a more sufficient man.
The handkerchief!
Hath founded his good fortunes on your love;
Shared dangers with you--
The handkerchief!
Sure, there's some wonder in this handkerchief!
They are all but stomachs, and we all but food;
They eat us hungerly, and when they are full
They belch us.
Look you--Cassio and my husband.
There is no other way; 'tis she must do 't,
And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.
How now, good Cassio, what's the news with you?
Madam, my former suit. I do beseech you
That by your virtuous means I may again
Exist, and be a member of his love
Whom I with all the office of my heart
Entirely honor. I would not be delayed.
If my offense be of such mortal kind
That nor my service past nor present sorrows
Nor purposed merit in futurity
Can ransom me into his love again,
But to know so must be my benefit.
So shall I clothe me in a forced content,
And shut myself up in some other course
To fortune's alms.
My advocation is not now in tune.
My lord is not my lord; nor should I know him
Were he in favor as in humor altered.
So help me every spirit sanctified
As I have spoken for you all my best,
And stood within the blank of his displeasure
For my free speech! You must awhile be patient.
What I can do I will; and more I will
Than for myself I dare. Let that suffice you.
Is my lord angry?
And certainly in strange unquietness.
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon
When it hath blown his ranks into the air
And, like the devil, from his very arm
Puffed his own brother--and is he angry?
Something of moment then. I will go meet him.
There's matter in 't indeed if he be angry.
Something, sure, of state,
Either from Venice, or some unhatched practice
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,
Hath puddled his clear spirit; and in such cases
Men's natures wrangle with inferior things,
Though great ones are their object. 'Tis even so.
For let our finger ache, and it endues
Our other healthful members even to a sense
Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods,
Nor of them look for such observancy
As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul.
But now I find I had suborned the witness,
And he's indicted falsely.
State matters, as you think, and no conception
Nor no jealous toy concerning you.
Alas the day, I never gave him cause!
But jealous souls will not be answered so.
They are not ever jealous for the cause,
But jealous for they're jealous. It is a monster
Begot upon itself, born on itself.
Heaven keep that monster from Othello's mind!
If I do find him fit, I'll move your suit
And seek to effect it to my uttermost.
How is 't with you, my most fair Bianca?
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.
What, keep a week away? Seven days and nights,
Eightscore eight hours, and lovers' absent hours
More tedious than the dial eightscore times?
But I shall in a more continuate time
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca,
Take me this work out.
This is some token from a newer friend.
To the felt absence now I feel a cause.
Is 't come to this? Well, well.
Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth,
From whence you have them. You are jealous now
That this is from some mistress, some
No, by my faith, Bianca.
As like enough it will, I would have it copied.
Take it, and do 't, and leave me for this time.
And think it no addition, nor my wish,
To have him see me womaned.
And say if I shall see you soon at night.
For I attend here. But I'll see you soon.
Will you think so?
To kiss in private?
Or to be naked with her friend in bed
An hour or more, not meaning any harm?
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm?
It is hypocrisy against the devil!
They that mean virtuously, and yet do so,
The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt
If they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip.
But if I give my wife a handkerchief--
Why then, 'tis hers, my lord, and being hers,
She may, I think, bestow 't on any man.
She is protectress of her honor, too.
May she give that?
Her honor is an essence that's not seen;
They have it very oft that have it not.
But for the handkerchief--
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it.
Thou saidst--O, it comes o'er my memory
As doth the raven o'er the infectious house,
Boding to all--he had my handkerchief.
Ay, what of that?
If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say (as knaves be such abroad,
Who having, by their own importunate suit
Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,
Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose
But they must blab)--
He hath, my lord, but be you well assured,
No more than he'll unswear.
Faith, that he did--I know not what he did.
Lie--
To confess and be hanged for his labor.
First to be hanged and then to confess--I tremble
My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are
And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,
All guiltless, meet reproach.--What ho! My lord!
My lord, I say. Othello!
How now, Cassio?
My lord is fall'n into an epilepsy.
This is his second fit. He had one yesterday.
Rub him about the temples.
The lethargy must have his quiet course.
If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by
Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs.
Do you withdraw yourself a little while.
He will recover straight. When he is gone,
How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?
Dost thou mock me?
Would you would bear your fortune like a man!
There's many a beast, then, in a populous city,
And many a civil monster.
Did he confess it?
Think every bearded fellow that's but yoked
May draw with you. There's millions now alive
That nightly lie in those unproper beds
Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better.
To lip a wanton in a secure couch
And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know,
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.
Confine yourself but in a patient list.
Whilst you were here, o'erwhelmed with your grief--
Cassio came hither. I shifted him away
And laid good 'scuses upon your ecstasy,
Bade him anon return and here speak with me,
The which he promised. Do but encave yourself,
And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns
That dwell in every region of his face.
For I will make him tell the tale anew--
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath and is again to cope your wife.
Or I shall say you're all in all in spleen,
And nothing of a man.
But  most bloody.
But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
Buys herself bread and clothes. It is a creature
That dotes on Cassio--as 'tis the strumpet's plague
To beguile many and be beguiled by one.
He, when he hears of her, cannot restrain
From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.
As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad,
And his unbookish jealousy must construe
Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behaviors
Quite in the wrong.--How do you, lieutenant?
The worser that you give me the addition
Whose want even kills me.
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on 't.
Now, if this suit lay in Bianca's power,
How quickly should you speed!
Alas, poor rogue, I think i' faith she loves me.
Now he denies it faintly and laughs it out.
Do you hear, Cassio?
To tell it o'er. Go to, well said, well said.
She gives it out that you shall marry her.
Do you intend it?
Do you triumph, Roman? Do you triumph?
Ha, ha, ha!
Faith, the cry goes that you marry her.
Iago beckons me. Now he begins the story.
Wheresoever you had it, I'll take out no work on 't.
How now, my sweet Bianca? How now? How now?
By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!
Iago?
Of so high and plenteous wit and invention!
Iago! O, Iago, the pity of it, Iago!
Excellent good.	
What trumpet is that same?
See, your wife's with him.
The Duke and the Senators of Venice greet you.
And what's the news, good cousin Lodovico?
Welcome to Cyprus.
Cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord
An unkind breach, but you shall make all well.
He did not call; he's busy in the paper.
Is there division 'twixt my lord and Cassio?
What, is he angry?
For, as I think, they do command him home,
Deputing Cassio in his government.
My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
Though I should swear I saw 't. 'Tis very much.
Make her amends. She weeps.
If that the Earth could teem with woman's tears,
Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.
Out of my sight!
Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn.
Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,
And turn again. And she can weep, sir, weep.
And she's obedient, as you say, obedient.
Very obedient.--Proceed you in your tears.--
Concerning this, sir--O, well-painted passion!--
And will return to Venice.--Hence, avaunt!
Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonight
You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and
Is this the noble Moor, whom our full senate
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature
Whom passion could not shake, whose solid virtue
The shot of accident nor dart of chance
Could neither graze nor pierce?
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?
He's that he is. I may not breathe my censure
What he might be. If what he might he is not,
That stroke would prove the worst.
Or did the letters work upon his blood
And new-create this fault?
It is not honesty in me to speak
What I have seen and known. You shall observe
And his own courses will denote him so
That I may save my speech. Do but go after
And mark how he continues.
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.
Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
Each syllable that breath made up between them.
What, did they never whisper?
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other,
Remove your thought. It doth abuse your bosom.
If any wretch have put this in your head,
Let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse,
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
There's no man happy. The purest of their wives
Is foul as slander.
She says enough. Yet she's a simple bawd
That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore,
And yet she'll kneel and pray. I have seen her do 't.
Pray you, chuck, come hither.
Let me see your eyes. Look in my face.
Leave procreants alone, and shut the door.
Cough, or cry "hem," if anybody come.
Your mystery, your mystery! Nay, dispatch.
Upon my knees, what doth your speech import?
But not the words.
Your wife, my lord, your true and loyal wife.
Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
Should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double
Swear thou art honest.
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.
To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false?
Ah, Desdemon, away, away, away!
Alas the heavy day, why do you weep?
Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
If haply you my father do suspect
An instrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him,
To try me with affliction, had they rained
All kind of sores and shames on my bare head,
Steeped me in poverty to the very lips,
Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,
To point his slow unmoving finger at--
Yet could I bear that too, well, very well.
But there where I have garnered up my heart,
Where either I must live or bear no life,
The fountain from the which my current runs
Or else dries up--to be discarded thence,
Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads
To knot and gender in--turn thy complexion there,
Patience, thou young and rose-lipped cherubin,
Ay, there look grim as hell.
That quicken even with blowing! O thou weed,
Who art so lovely fair, and smell'st so sweet
That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
Made to write "whore" upon? What committed?
Committed? O thou public commoner,
That would to cinders burn up modesty,
Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed?
Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
The bawdy wind that kisses all it meets
Is hushed within the hollow mine of earth
And will not hear 't. What committed?
Impudent strumpet!
If to preserve this vessel for my lord
From any other foul unlawful touch
Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.
That married with Othello.--You, mistress,
That have the office opposite to Saint Peter
And keeps the gate of hell--you, you, ay, you!
We have done our course. There's money for your
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?
Good madam, what's the matter with my lord?
Who is thy lord?
But what should go by water. Prithee, tonight
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets. Remember.
And call thy husband hither.
How have I been behaved that he might stick
The small'st opinion on my least misuse?
What is your pleasure, madam? How is 't with you?
Do it with gentle means and easy tasks.
He might have chid me so, for, in good faith,
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her,
Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her
As true hearts cannot bear.
Am I that name, Iago?
Such as she said my lord did say I was.
He called her "whore." A beggar in his drink
Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.
Do not weep, do not weep! Alas the day!
Hath she forsook so many noble matches,
Her father and her country and her friends,
To be called "whore"? Would it not make one
Beshrew him for 't! How comes this trick upon him?
Some busy and insinuating rogue,
Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
Have not devised this slander. I will be hanged else.
Fie, there is no such man. It is impossible.
If any such there be, heaven pardon him.
Why should he call her "whore"? Who keeps her
What place? What time? What form? What
The Moor's abused by some most villainous knave,
Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.
And put in every honest hand a whip
To lash the rascals naked through the world,
Even from the east to th' west!
That turned your wit the seamy side without
And made you to suspect me with the Moor.
You are a fool. Go to!
What shall I do to win my lord again?
Good friend, go to him. For by this light of heaven,
If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love,
Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,
Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense
Delighted them in any other form,
Or that I do not yet, and ever did,
And ever will--though he do shake me off
To beggarly divorcement--love him dearly,
Comfort forswear me!  Unkindness may
And his unkindness may defeat my life,
But never taint my love. I cannot say "whore"--
It does abhor me now I speak the word.
To do the act that might the addition earn,
Not the world's mass of vanity could make me.
The business of the state does him offense,
And he does chide with you.
If 'twere no other--
Hark how these instruments summon to supper.
The messengers of Venice stays the meat.
Go in and weep not. All things shall be well.
How now, Roderigo?
That thou deal'st justly with me.
Iago, and rather, as it seems to me now,
Thou hast taken against me a most just exception,
Roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed which I
Venice to depute Cassio in Othello's place.
Attendants.]
Madam, good night. I humbly thank your Ladyship.
Will you walk, sir?--O, Desdemona--
Look 't be done.
How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.
He says he will return incontinent,
And hath commanded me to go to bed,
And bade me to dismiss you.
It was his bidding. Therefore, good Emilia,
Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu.
We must not now displease him.
So would not I. My love doth so approve him
That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns--
Prithee, unpin me--have grace and favor in them.
All's one. Good faith, how foolish are our minds!
If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud me
In one of those same sheets.
My mother had a maid called Barbary.
She was in love, and he she loved proved mad
And did forsake her. She had a song of willow,
An old thing 'twas, but it expressed her fortune,
And she died singing it. That song tonight
Will not go from my mind. I have much to do
But to go hang my head all at one side
And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee, dispatch.
This Lodovico is a proper man.
Lay by these.
Prithee hie thee! He'll come anon.
Nay, that's not next. Hark, who is 't that knocks?
So, get thee gone. Good night. Mine eyes do itch;
Doth that bode weeping?
Dost thou in conscience think--tell me, Emilia--
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such gross kind?
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
Why, would not you?
Nor I neither, by this heavenly light.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
But for the whole world--'Uds pity! Who
But I do think it is their husbands' faults
If wives do fall. Say that they slack their duties,
And pour our treasures into foreign laps;
Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
Throwing restraint upon us. Or say they strike us,
Or scant our former having in despite.
Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace,
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know
Their wives have sense like them. They see, and
And have their palates both for sweet and sour,
As husbands have. What is it that they do
When they change us for others? Is it sport?
It is so too. And have not we affections,
Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
Then let them use us well. Else let them know,
The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
Good night, good night. God me such uses send,
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend.
Here, stand behind this bulk. Straight will he
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home.
Quick, quick! Fear nothing. I'll be at thy elbow.
It makes us or it mars us--think on that,
And fix most firm thy resolution.
Be near at hand. I may miscarry in 't.
Here, at thy hand. Be bold and take thy stand.
And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.
And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo,
He calls me to a restitution large
Of gold and jewels that I bobbed from him
As gifts to Desdemona.
It must not be. If Cassio do remain,
He hath a daily beauty in his life
That makes me ugly. And besides, the Moor
May unfold me to him. There stand I in much peril.
No, he must die. Be 't so. I hear him coming.
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed
But that my coat is better than thou know'st.
The voice of Cassio! Iago keeps his word.
That hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong!
Thou teachest me.--Minion, your dear lies dead,
And your unblest fate hies. Strumpet, I come.
Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are
Thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lust's blood be
What ho! No watch? No passage? Murder, murder!
Two or three groan. 'Tis heavy night.
These may be counterfeits. Let's think 't unsafe
To come in to the cry without more help.
Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.
Here's one comes in his shirt, with light and
Who's there? Whose noise is this that cries on
We do not know.
Here, here! For heaven's sake, help me!
This is Othello's ancient, as I take it.
The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.
What are you here that cry so grievously?
Iago? O, I am spoiled, undone by villains.
Give me some help!
And cannot make away.
Come in, and give some help.
That's one of them.
Kill men i' th' dark?--Where be these bloody
How silent is this town! Ho, murder, murder!--
What may you be? Are you of good or evil?
As you shall prove us, praise us.
How is 't, brother?
Light, gentlemen. I'll bind it with my shirt.
What is the matter, ho? Who is 't that cried?
Who is 't that cried?
My sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
Who they should be that have thus mangled you?
Lend me a garter. So.--O for a chair
To bear him easily hence!
Alas, he faints. O, Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
To be a party in this injury.--
Patience awhile, good Cassio.--Come, come;
Lend me a light.  Know we this
Alas, my friend and my dear countryman
Roderigo? No! Yes, sure. O heaven, Roderigo!
Signior Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon.
These bloody accidents must excuse my manners
That so neglected you.
How do you, Cassio?--O, a chair, a chair!
He, he, 'tis he!  O, that's well
Some good man bear him carefully from hence.
Save you your labor.--He that lies slain here,
Cassio,
Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?
None in the world. Nor do I know the man.
What, look you pale?--O, bear him out o' th' air.
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?--
Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.--
Behold her well. I pray you, look upon her.
Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness will speak
Though tongues were out of use.
Alas, what is the matter? What is the matter,
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
By Roderigo and fellows that are scaped.
He's almost slain, and Roderigo dead.
Alas, good gentleman! Alas, good Cassio!
This is the fruits of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,
Go know of Cassio where he supped tonight.
He supped at my house, but I therefore shake not.
As you that thus abuse me.
Kind gentlemen, let's go see poor Cassio dressed.--
Come, mistress, you must tell 's another tale.--
Emilia, run you to the citadel
And tell my lord and lady what hath happed.--
Will you go on afore?  This is the night
That either makes me or fordoes me quite.
It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul.
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars.
It is the cause. Yet I'll not shed her blood,
Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow,
And smooth as monumental alabaster.
Yet she must die, else she'll betray more men.
Put out the light, and then put out the light.
If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
Should I repent me. But once put out thy light,
Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature,
That can thy light relume. When I have plucked the
It needs must wither. I'll smell it on the tree.
Justice to break her sword!  One
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee
And love thee after. One more, and this the last.
So sweet was ne'er so fatal. I must weep,
But they are cruel tears. This sorrow's heavenly:
It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.
Who's there? Othello?
Have you prayed tonight, Desdemon?
If you bethink yourself of any crime
Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace,
Solicit for it straight.
What may you mean by that?
Well, do it, and be brief. I will walk by.
No, heaven forfend! I would not kill thy soul.
Ay, I do.
If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.
And yet I fear you, for you're fatal then
When your eyes roll so. Why I should fear I know
Since guiltiness I know not, but yet I feel I fear.
Think on thy sins.
That death's unnatural that kills for loving.
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame.
These are portents, but yet I hope, I hope
They do not point on me.
Which I so loved, and gave thee, thou gav'st to
Cassio.
No, by my life and soul! Send for the man
And ask him.
Sweet soul, take heed, take heed of perjury.
Thou art on thy deathbed.
Ay, but not yet to die.
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin.
For to deny each article with oath
Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.
Then Lord have mercy on me!
And have you mercy, too. I never did
Offend you in my life, never loved Cassio
But with such general warranty of heaven
As I might love. I never gave him token.
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in 's hand!
And mak'st me call what I intend to do
Let him confess a truth.
That he hath used thee.
He will not say so.
Honest Iago hath ta'en order for 't.
Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
Had stomach for them all.
Alas, he is betrayed, and I undone.	
Out, strumpet! Weep'st thou for him to my face?
Kill me tomorrow, let me live tonight.
But half an hour!
But while I say one prayer!
My lord, my lord? What ho! My lord, my lord!
What noise is this?--Not dead? Not yet quite dead?
So, so.
Yes. 'Tis Emilia.--By and by.--She's dead.
The noise was here. Ha, no more moving?
Still as the grave. Shall she come in? Were 't good?
If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife.
My wife, my wife! What wife? I have no wife.
Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse
Of sun and moon, and that th' affrighted globe
Should yawn at alteration.
That I may speak with you. O, good my lord--
Soft, by and by, let me the curtains draw.--
Where art thou?
What's the matter with thee now?
It is the very error of the moon.
She comes more nearer Earth than she was wont
And makes men mad.
Roderigo killed? And Cassio killed?
Not Cassio killed? Then murder's out of tune,
And sweet revenge grows harsh.
Out, and alas, that was my lady's voice!
Help! Help ho! Help! O lady, speak again!
Sweet Desdemona, O sweet mistress, speak!
Commend me to my kind lord. O, farewell.
Why, how should she be murdered?
You heard her say herself, it was not I.
She said so. I must needs report the truth.
She's like a liar gone to burning hell!
She turned to folly, and she was a whore.
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil!
That she was false. O, she was heavenly true!
Cassio did top her. Ask thy husband else.
But that I did proceed upon just grounds
To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.
Ay, with Cassio. Had she been true,
If heaven would make me such another world
Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,
Ay, 'twas he that told me on her first.
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
That sticks on filthy deeds.
What needs this iterance, woman? I say, thy
My husband say she was false?
My friend, thy husband; honest, honest Iago.
If he say so, may his pernicious soul
Rot half a grain a day! He lies to th' heart!
She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven
Than thou wast worthy her.
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm
As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt,
As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed--
Though I lost twenty lives. Help! Help, ho! Help!
The Moor hath killed my mistress! Murder, murder!
What is the matter? How now, general?
That men must lay their murders on your neck.
Disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man.
He says thou told'st him that his wife was false.
Speak, for my heart is full.
Than what he found himself was apt and true.
But did you ever tell him she was false?
You told a lie, an odious, damned lie!
Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie!
She false with Cassio? Did you say with Cassio?
With Cassio, mistress. Go to! Charm your tongue.
My mistress here lies murdered in her bed.
And your reports have set the murder on!
Nay, stare not, masters; it is true indeed.
What, are you mad? I charge you get you home.
Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak.
Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home.
For thou hast killed the sweetest innocent
That e'er did lift up eye.
Whose breath indeed these hands have newly
Poor Desdemon, I am glad thy father's dead.
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain. Did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn,
Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
And fall to reprobance.
That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
And she did gratify his amorous works
With that recognizance and pledge of love
Which I first gave her. I saw it in his hand.
It was a handkerchief, an antique token
My father gave my mother.
Zounds, hold your peace!
No, I will speak as liberal as the north.
Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,
All, all, cry shame against me, yet I'll speak.
For often, with a solemn earnestness
He begged of me to steal 't.
She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found it,
And I did give 't my husband.
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen!
Do with so good a wife?
But what serves for the thunder?--Precious villain!
The woman falls! Sure he hath killed his wife.
Ay, ay! O, lay me by my mistress' side.	
Which I have here recovered from the Moor.
Come, guard the door without. Let him not pass,
But kill him rather. I'll after that same villain,
For 'tis a damned slave.
But every puny whipster gets my sword.
But why should honor outlive honesty?
Let it go all.
Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan
And die in music.
Moor, she was chaste. She loved thee, cruel Moor.
So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true.
So speaking as I think, alas, I die. 	
It is a sword of Spain, the ice brook's temper.
If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear;
Thou hast no weapon and perforce must suffer.
Look in upon me, then, and speak with me,
Or naked as I am I will assault thee.
What is the matter?
Upon a soldier's thigh. I have seen the day
That with this little arm and this good sword
Than twenty times your stop. But--O vain boast!--
Who can control his fate? 'Tis not so now.
Be not afraid, though you do see me weaponed.
Here is my journey's end, here is my butt
And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.
Do you go back dismayed? 'Tis a lost fear.
Man but a rush against Othello's breast,
And he retires. Where should Othello go?
Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starred wench,
Pale as thy smock, when we shall meet at compt,
This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven,
And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl?
Even like thy chastity.--O cursed, cursed slave!--
Whip me, you devils,
From the possession of this heavenly sight!
Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulfur,
Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?
That's he that was Othello. Here I am.
Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.
If that thou be'st a devil, I cannot kill thee.
Wrench his sword from him.
For in my sense 'tis happiness to die.
Fall'n in the practice of a damned slave,
What shall be said to thee?
An honorable murderer, if you will,
For naught I did in hate, but all in honor.
This wretch hath part confessed his villainy.
Did you and he consent in Cassio's death?
Dear general, I never gave you cause.
Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil
Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?
Demand me nothing. What you know, you know.
From this time forth I never will speak word.
You shall understand what hath befall'n,
Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter
Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,
And here another.  The one of
The death of Cassio, to be undertook
By Roderigo.
Now here's another discontented paper
Found in his pocket, too; and this it seems
Roderigo meant t' have sent this damned villain,
But that, belike, Iago in the interim
Came in and satisfied him.
How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
That was my wife's?
And he himself confessed it but even now,
That there he dropped it for a special purpose
Which wrought to his desire.
There is besides, in Roderigo's letter,
How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came
That I was cast. And even but now he spake,
After long seeming dead: Iago hurt him,
Iago set him on.
You must forsake this room and go with us.
Your power and your command is taken off,
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,
If there be any cunning cruelty
That can torment him much and hold him long,
It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest,
Till that the nature of your fault be known
To the Venetian state.--Come, bring away.
Soft you. A word or two before you go.
No more of that. I pray you in your letters,
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of me as I am. Nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in malice. Then must you speak
Of one that loved not wisely, but too well;
Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought,
Perplexed in the extreme; of one whose hand,
Like the base Judean, threw a pearl away
Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdued
Albeit unused to the melting mood,
Drops tears as fast as the Arabian trees
Their medicinable gum. Set you down this.
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant and a turbanned Turk
Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,
And smote him, thus.	
Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.	
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon,
For he was great of heart.
More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea,
Look on the tragic loading of this bed.
This is thy work.--The object poisons sight.
Let it be hid.--Gratiano, keep the house,
And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
For they succeed on you.  To you, lord
Remains the censure of this hellish villain.
The time, the place, the torture, O, enforce it.
Myself will straight aboard, and to the state
This heavy act with heavy heart relate.
Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
Draws on apace. Four happy days bring in
Another moon. But, O, methinks how slow
This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires
Like to a stepdame or a dowager
Long withering out a young man's revenue.
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
And then the moon, like to a silver bow
New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night
Of our solemnities.
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments.
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth.
Turn melancholy forth to funerals;
The pale companion is not for our pomp.
Hippolyta, I wooed thee with my sword
And won thy love doing thee injuries,
But I will wed thee in another key,
With pomp, with triumph, and with reveling.
Happy be Theseus, our renowned duke!
Thanks, good Egeus. What's the news with thee?
Full of vexation come I, with complaint
Against my child, my daughter Hermia.--
Stand forth, Demetrius.--My noble lord,
This man hath my consent to marry her.--
Stand forth, Lysander.--And, my gracious duke,
This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child.--
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes
And interchanged love tokens with my child.
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung
With feigning voice verses of feigning love
And stol'n the impression of her fantasy
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits,
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats--messengers
Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth.
With cunning hast thou filched my daughter's heart,
Turned her obedience 
To stubborn harshness.--And, my gracious duke,
Be it so she will not here before your Grace
Consent to marry with Demetrius,
As she is mine, I may dispose of her,
Which shall be either to this gentleman
Or to her death, according to our law
Immediately provided in that case.
What say you, Hermia? Be advised, fair maid.
To you, your father should be as a god,
One that composed your beauties, yea, and one
To whom you are but as a form in wax
By him imprinted, and within his power
To leave the figure or disfigure it.
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.
So is Lysander.
But in this kind, wanting your father's voice,
The other must be held the worthier.
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
Nor how it may concern my modesty
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts;
But I beseech your Grace that I may know
The worst that may befall me in this case
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.
Either to die the death or to abjure
Forever the society of men.
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
Whether 
You can endure the livery of a nun,
For aye to be in shady cloister mewed,
To live a barren sister all your life,
Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage,
But earthlier happy is the rose distilled
Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn,
Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness.
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up
Unto his Lordship whose unwished yoke
My soul consents not to give sovereignty.
Take time to pause, and by the next new moon
For everlasting bond of fellowship),
Upon that day either prepare to die
For disobedience to your father's will,
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
Or on Diana's altar to protest
For aye austerity and single life.
Relent, sweet Hermia, and, Lysander, yield
Thy crazed title to my certain right.
You have her father's love, Demetrius.
Let me have Hermia's. Do you marry him.
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love;
And what is mine my love shall render him.
And she is mine, and all my right of her
As well possessed. My love is more than his;
My fortunes every way as fairly ranked
And 
Why should not I then prosecute my right?
Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head,
Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,
And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
Upon this spotted and inconstant man.
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
But, being overfull of self-affairs,
My mind did lose it.--But, Demetrius, come,
And come, Egeus; you shall go with me.
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
To fit your fancies to your father's will,
Or else the law of Athens yields you up
To death or to a vow of single life.--
Come, my Hippolyta. What cheer, my love?--
Demetrius and Egeus, go along.
Against our nuptial and confer with you
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.
With duty and desire we follow you.
How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale?
How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
Belike for want of rain, which I could well
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.
Ay me! For aught that I could ever read,
Could ever hear by tale or history,
The course of true love never did run smooth.
But either it was different in blood--
Or else misgraffed in respect of years--
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends--
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
Making it momentany as a sound,
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
Brief as the lightning in the collied night,
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and Earth,
And, ere a man hath power to say "Behold!"
The jaws of darkness do devour it up.
So quick bright things come to confusion.
If then true lovers have been ever crossed,
It stands as an edict in destiny.
Then let us teach our trial patience
Because it is a customary cross,
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
Wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers.
Of great revenue, and she hath no child.
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues,
And she respects me as her only son.
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;
And to that place the sharp Athenian law
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me, then
Steal forth thy father's house tomorrow night,
And in the wood a league without the town
To do observance to a morn of May),
There will I stay for thee.
By his best arrow with the golden head,
By the simplicity of Venus' doves,
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen
When the false Trojan under sail was seen,
By all the vows that ever men have broke
In that same place thou hast appointed me,
Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.
Godspeed, fair Helena. Whither away?
Call you me "fair"? That "fair" again unsay.
Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair!
Your eyes are lodestars and your tongue's sweet air
More tunable than lark to shepherd's ear
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
Sickness is catching. O, were favor so!
Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go.
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye;
My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
The rest I'd give to be to you translated.
You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart!
The more I hate, the more he follows me.
The more I love, the more he hateth me.
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.
None but your beauty. Would that fault were mine!
Take comfort: he no more shall see my face.
Lysander and myself will fly this place.
Before the time I did Lysander see
Seemed Athens as a paradise to me.
That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell!
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold.
Tomorrow night when Phoebe doth behold
Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass,
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass
Through Athens' gates have we devised to steal.
And in the wood where often you and I
Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie,
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
There my Lysander and myself shall meet
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes
To seek new friends and stranger companies.
Farewell, sweet playfellow. Pray thou for us,
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius.--
Keep word, Lysander. We must starve our sight
From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.
Helena, adieu.
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!
How happy some o'er other some can be!
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so.
He will not know what all but he do know.
And, as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,
So I, admiring of his qualities.
Things base and vile, holding no quantity,
Love can transpose to form and dignity.
Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind;
And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind.
Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste.
Wings, and no eyes, figure unheedy haste.
And therefore is Love said to be a child
Because in choice he is so oft beguiled.
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
So the boy Love is perjured everywhere.
For, ere Demetrius looked on Hermia's eyne,
He hailed down oaths that he was only mine;
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
So he dissolved, and show'rs of oaths did melt.
Then to the wood will he tomorrow night
Pursue her. And, for this intelligence
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense.
But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
To have his sight thither and back again.
Bottom the weaver, and Flute the bellows-mender, and
Snout the tinker, and Starveling the tailor.]
Thisbe."
This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players.
This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein. A lover is more
Thisne!"--"Ah Pyramus, my lover dear! Thy Thisbe
And I hope here is a play fitted.
Pyramus.
How now, spirit? Whither wander you?
And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear.
Farewell, thou lob of spirits. I'll be gone.
Our queen and all her elves come here anon.
The King doth keep his revels here tonight.
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight,
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath
Because that she, as her attendant, hath
She never had so sweet a changeling.
And jealous Oberon would have the child
Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild.
But she perforce withholds the loved boy,
Crowns him with flowers and makes him all her
And now they never meet in grove or green,
By fountain clear or spangled starlight sheen,
But they do square, that all their elves for fear
Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.
Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
Called Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he
That frights the maidens of the villagery,
Skim milk, and sometimes labor in the quern
And bootless make the breathless huswife churn,
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
Mislead night wanderers, laughing at their harm?
Those that "Hobgoblin" call you and "sweet Puck,"
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
Are not you he?
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal.
And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl
In very likeness of a roasted crab,
And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob
And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she
And "Tailor!" cries and falls into a cough,
And then the whole choir hold their hips and loffe
And waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear
But room, fairy. Here comes Oberon.
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!
Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.
What, jealous Oberon? Fairies, skip hence.
Tarry, rash wanton. Am not I thy lord?
Then I must be thy lady. But I know
When thou hast stolen away from Fairyland
And in the shape of Corin sat all day
Playing on pipes of corn and versing love
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,
Come from the farthest steep of India,
But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,
Your buskined mistress and your warrior love,
To Theseus must be wedded, and you come
To give their bed joy and prosperity?
How canst thou thus for shame, Titania,
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering
From Perigouna, whom he ravished,
And make him with fair Aegles break his faith,
With Ariadne and Antiopa?
These are the forgeries of jealousy;
And never, since the middle summer's spring,
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
By paved fountain or by rushy brook,
Or in the beached margent of the sea,
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport.
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
As in revenge have sucked up from the sea
Contagious fogs, which, falling in the land,
Hath every pelting river made so proud
That they have overborne their continents.
The ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain,
The plowman lost his sweat, and the green corn
Hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard.
The fold stands empty in the drowned field,
And crows are fatted with the murrain flock.
The nine-men's-morris is filled up with mud,
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green,
For lack of tread, are undistinguishable.
The human mortals want their winter here.
No night is now with hymn or carol blessed.
Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
That rheumatic diseases do abound.
And thorough this distemperature we see
The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose,
And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer,
The childing autumn, angry winter, change
Their wonted liveries, and the mazed world
By their increase now knows not which is which.
And this same progeny of evils comes
From our debate, from our dissension;
We are their parents and original.
Do you amend it, then. It lies in you.
Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
To be my henchman.
The Fairyland buys not the child of me.
His mother was a vot'ress of my order,
And in the spiced Indian air by night
Full often hath she gossiped by my side
And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands,
Marking th' embarked traders on the flood,
When we have laughed to see the sails conceive
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait,
Following (her womb then rich with my young
Would imitate and sail upon the land
To fetch me trifles and return again,
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
But she, being mortal, of that boy did die,
And for her sake do I rear up her boy,
And for her sake I will not part with him.
How long within this wood intend you stay?
Perchance till after Theseus' wedding day.
If you will patiently dance in our round
And see our moonlight revels, go with us.
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.
Give me that boy and I will go with thee.
Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away.
We shall chide downright if I longer stay.
Well, go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove
Till I torment thee for this injury.--
My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememb'rest
Since once I sat upon a promontory
And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
That the rude sea grew civil at her song
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
To hear the sea-maid's music.
That very time I saw ,
Flying between the cold moon and the Earth,
Cupid all armed. A certain aim he took
At a fair vestal throned by the west,
And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts.
But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft
Quenched in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon,
And the imperial vot'ress passed on
In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupid fell.
It fell upon a little western flower,
Before, milk-white, now purple with love's wound,
And maidens call it "love-in-idleness."
Fetch me that flower; the herb I showed thee once.
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid
Will make or man or woman madly dote
Upon the next live creature that it sees.
Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again
Ere the leviathan can swim a league.
In forty minutes.	
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes.
The next thing then she, waking, looks upon
On meddling monkey, or on busy ape)
She shall pursue it with the soul of love.
And ere I take this charm from off her sight
But who comes here? I am invisible,
And I will overhear their conference.
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
The one I'll stay; the other stayeth me.
Thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood,
And here am I, and wood within this wood
Because I cannot meet my Hermia.
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant!
But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,
And I shall have no power to follow you.
Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?
Or rather do I not in plainest truth
Tell you I do not, nor I cannot love you?
And even for that do I love you the more.
The more you beat me I will fawn on you.
Use me but as your spaniel: spurn me, strike me,
Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave
What worser place can I beg in your love
Than to be used as you use your dog?
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit,
For I am sick when I do look on thee.
And I am sick when I look not on you.
You do impeach your modesty too much
To leave the city and commit yourself
Into the hands of one that loves you not,
To trust the opportunity of night
And the ill counsel of a desert place
With the rich worth of your virginity.
Your virtue is my privilege. For that
It is not night when I do see your face,
Therefore I think I am not in the night.
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
For you, in my respect, are all the world.
Then, how can it be said I am alone
When all the world is here to look on me?
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.
The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
Run when you will. The story shall be changed:
Apollo flies and Daphne holds the chase;
The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind
Makes speed to catch the tiger. Bootless speed
When cowardice pursues and valor flies!
Or if thou follow me, do not believe
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.
Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex.
We cannot fight for love as men may do.
We should be wooed and were not made to woo.
To die upon the hand I love so well.	
Fare thee well, nymph. Ere he do leave this grove,
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.
Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.
Ay, there it is.
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
Quite overcanopied with luscious woodbine,
With sweet muskroses, and with eglantine.
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
Lulled in these flowers with dances and delight.
And there the snake throws her enameled skin,
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in.
And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes
And make her full of hateful fantasies.
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove.
With a disdainful youth. Anoint his eyes,
But do it when the next thing he espies
May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man
By the Athenian garments he hath on.
Effect it with some care, that he may prove
More fond on her than she upon her love.
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.
Fear not, my lord. Your servant shall do so.
Come, now a roundel and a fairy song;
Then, for the third part of a minute, hence--
Some to kill cankers in the muskrose buds,
Some war with reremice for their leathern wings
To make my small elves coats, and some keep back
The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders
At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep.
Then to your offices and let me rest.	
Hence, away! Now all is well.
One aloof stand sentinel.	
Fair love, you faint with wand'ring in the wood.
We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
Be it so, Lysander. Find you out a bed,
For I upon this bank will rest my head.
One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.
Nay, good Lysander. For my sake, my dear,
Lie further off yet. Do not lie so near.
Love takes the meaning in love's conference.
So that but one heart we can make of it;
Two bosoms interchained with an oath--
So then two bosoms and a single troth.
Then by your side no bed-room me deny,
For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.
Lysander riddles very prettily.
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied.
But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy,
Lie further off in human modesty.
Such separation, as may well be said,
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid.
So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend.
Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!
And then end life when I end loyalty!
Here is my bed. Sleep give thee all his rest!
With half that wish the wisher's eyes be pressed!
Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.
Stay, on thy peril. I alone will go.	
The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies,
For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.
How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears.
If so, my eyes are oftener washed than hers.
No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,
For beasts that meet me run away for fear.
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
Do as a monster fly my presence thus.
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine
Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne?
But who is here? Lysander, on the ground!
Dead or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.--
Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.
And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.
Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
Is that vile name to perish on my sword!
Do not say so. Lysander, say not so.
What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what
Yet Hermia still loves you. Then be content.
Content with Hermia? No, I do repent
The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
Not Hermia, but Helena I love.
Who will not change a raven for a dove?
The will of man is by his reason swayed,
And reason says you are the worthier maid.
Things growing are not ripe until their season;
So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason.
And touching now the point of human skill,
Reason becomes the marshal to my will
And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook
Love's stories written in love's richest book.
Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
Is 't not enough, is 't not enough, young man,
That I did never, no, nor never can
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye,
But you must flout my insufficiency?
Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,
In such disdainful manner me to woo.
But fare you well. Perforce I must confess
Should of another therefore be abused!	
She sees not Hermia.--Hermia, sleep thou there,
And never mayst thou come Lysander near.
For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,
Or as the heresies that men do leave
Are hated most of those they did deceive,
So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,
Of all be hated, but the most of me!
And, all my powers, address your love and might
To honor Helen and to be her knight.	
Help me, Lysander, help me! Do thy best
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast.
Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here!
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear.
Methought a serpent ate my heart away,
And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.
Lysander! What, removed? Lysander, lord!
What, out of hearing? Gone? No sound, no word?
Alack, where are you? Speak, an if you hear.
Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.--
No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.
Either death or you I'll find immediately.
Bottom, Quince, Snout, Starveling, Snug, and Flute.]
Write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to
Pyramus is not killed indeed. And, for the more
Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver. This will put them
Find out moonshine, find out moonshine.
Bottom?
Pyramus and Thisbe whisper.
What hempen homespuns have we swagg'ring here
So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?
What, a play toward? I'll be an auditor--
An actor too perhaps, if I see cause.
Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,
And neigh and bark and grunt and roar and burn,
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
What angel wakes me from my flow'ry bed?
Mine ear is much enamored of thy note,
So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape,
And thy fair virtue's force perforce doth move me
On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee.
The more the pity that some honest neighbors will
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.
Out of this wood do not desire to go.
Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.
The summer still doth tend upon my state,
And I do love thee. Therefore go with me.
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep
And sing while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep.
And I will purge thy mortal grossness so
That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.--
Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Mote, and Mustardseed!
Mote, and Mustardseed.]
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman.
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees,
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs
And light them at the fiery glowworms' eyes
To have my love to bed and to arise;
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.
Master Cobweb. If I cut my finger, I shall make
Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of
Come, wait upon him. Lead him to my bower.
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,
Tie up my lover's tongue. Bring him silently.
Then what it was that next came in her eye,
Which she must dote on in extremity.
Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit?
What night-rule now about this haunted grove?
My mistress with a monster is in love.
Near to her close and consecrated bower,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
Were met together to rehearse a play
Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day.
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort,
Who Pyramus presented in their sport,
Forsook his scene and entered in a brake.
When I did him at this advantage take,
An ass's noll I fixed on his head.
Anon his Thisbe must be answered,
And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
Rising and cawing at the gun's report,
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
So at his sight away his fellows fly,
And, at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls.
He "Murder" cries and help from Athens calls.
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong;
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch,
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things
And left sweet Pyramus translated there.
When in that moment, so it came to pass,
Titania waked and straightway loved an ass.
This falls out better than I could devise.
But hast thou yet latched the Athenian's eyes
With the love juice, as I did bid thee do?
And the Athenian woman by his side,
That, when he waked, of force she must be eyed.
Stand close. This is the same Athenian.
This is the woman, but not this the man.
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe!
Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep
And kill me too.
The sun was not so true unto the day
As he to me. Would he have stolen away
From sleeping Hermia? I'll believe as soon
This whole Earth may be bored, and that the moon
May through the center creep and so displease
Her brother's noontide with th' Antipodes.
It cannot be but thou hast murdered him.
So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.
So should the murdered look, and so should I,
Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty.
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.
What's this to my Lysander? Where is he?
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
Out, dog! Out, cur! Thou driv'st me past the bounds
Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
Henceforth be never numbered among men.
Durst thou have looked upon him, being awake?
And hast thou killed him sleeping? O brave touch!
Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
An adder did it, for with doubler tongue
Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.
You spend your passion on a misprised mood.
Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.
An if I could, what should I get therefor?
And from thy hated presence part I so.
See me no more, whether he be dead or no.
There is no following her in this fierce vein.
Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow
For debt that bankrout sleep doth sorrow owe,
Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
If for his tender here I make some stay.
What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite
And laid the love juice on some true-love's sight.
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
Some true-love turned, and not a false turned true.
Then fate o'errules, that, one man holding troth,
About the wood go swifter than the wind,
And Helena of Athens look thou find.
All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer
With sighs of love that costs the fresh blood dear.
By some illusion see thou bring her here.
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.	
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true?
You do advance your cunning more and more.
These vows are Hermia's. Will you give her o'er?
Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
Will even weigh, and both as light as tales.
Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.
Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.
To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,
Fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
When thou hold'st up thy hand. O, let me kiss
This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!
To set against me for your merriment.
If you were civil and knew courtesy,
You would not do me thus much injury.
Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
But you must join in souls to mock me too?
If you were men, as men you are in show,
You would not use a gentle lady so,
To vow and swear and superpraise my parts,
When, I am sure, you hate me with your hearts.
You both are rivals and love Hermia,
And now both rivals to mock Helena.
To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes
With your derision! None of noble sort
Would so offend a virgin and extort
You are unkind, Demetrius. Be not so,
For you love Hermia; this you know I know.
And here with all goodwill, with all my heart,
In Hermia's love I yield you up my part.
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
Whom I do love and will do till my death.
Never did mockers waste more idle breath.
Lysander, keep thy Hermia. I will none.
If e'er I loved her, all that love is gone.
My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourned,
And now to Helen is it home returned,
There to remain.
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear.
Look where thy love comes. Yonder is thy dear.
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
The ear more quick of apprehension makes;
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
It pays the hearing double recompense.
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?
Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?
What love could press Lysander from my side?
Lysander's love, that would not let him bide,
Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light.
Why seek'st thou me? Could not this make thee
The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?
You speak not as you think. It cannot be.
Lo, she is one of this confederacy!
Now I perceive they have conjoined all three
To fashion this false sport in spite of me.--
Injurious Hermia, most ungrateful maid,
Have you conspired, have you with these contrived,
To bait me with this foul derision?
Is all the counsel that we two have shared,
The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent
When we have chid the hasty-footed time
For parting us--O, is all forgot?
All schooldays' friendship, childhood innocence?
We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,
Have with our needles created both one flower,
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
Both warbling of one song, both in one key,
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds
Had been incorporate. So we grew together
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
But yet an union in partition,
Two lovely berries molded on one stem;
So with two seeming bodies but one heart,
Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
Due but to one, and crowned with one crest.
And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
It is not friendly; 'tis not maidenly.
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
Though I alone do feel the injury.
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
To follow me and praise my eyes and face,
And made your other love, Demetrius,
Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,
To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,
Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander
Deny your love 
And tender me, forsooth, affection,
But by your setting on, by your consent?
What though I be not so in grace as you,
So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
But miserable most, to love unloved?
This you should pity rather than despise.
Ay, do. Persever, counterfeit sad looks,
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up.
This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
You would not make me such an argument.
But fare you well. 'Tis partly my own fault,
Which death or absence soon shall remedy.
Stay, gentle Helena. Hear my excuse,
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena.
Sweet, do not scorn her so.
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat.
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak
Helen, I love thee. By my life, I do.
To prove him false that says I love thee not.
If thou say so, withdraw and prove it too.
Quick, come.
Away, you Ethiop!
No, no. He'll
Seem to break loose.  Take on as you
But yet come not. You are a tame man, go!
Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! Vile thing, let loose,
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.
Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,
Sweet love?
Out, loathed med'cine! O, hated potion, hence!
Do you not jest?
Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.
What? Should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so.
What, can you do me greater harm than hate?
Hate me? Wherefore? O me, what news, my love?
Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?
Since night you loved me; yet since night you left
Why, then, you left me--O, the gods forbid!--
In earnest, shall I say?
And never did desire to see thee more.
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt.
Be certain, nothing truer, 'tis no jest
That I do hate thee and love Helena.
You thief of love! What, have you come by night
And stol'n my love's heart from him?
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
Fie, fie, you counterfeit, you puppet, you!
Now I perceive that she hath made compare
Between our statures; she hath urged her height,
And with her personage, her tall personage,
Her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with him.
And are you grown so high in his esteem
Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak!
How low am I? I am not yet so low
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.
Let her not hurt me. I was never curst;
Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,
Because she is something lower than myself,
That I can match her.
Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
Did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you--
Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
He followed you; for love, I followed him.
But he hath chid me hence and threatened me
To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too.
And now, so you will let me quiet go,
To Athens will I bear my folly back
And follow you no further. Let me go.
You see how simple and how fond I am.
Why, get you gone. Who is 't that hinders you?
What, with Lysander?
Be not afraid. She shall not harm thee, Helena.
No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.
She was a vixen when she went to school,
And though she be but little, she is fierce.
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
Let me come to her.
You minimus of hind'ring knotgrass made,
You bead, you acorn--
In her behalf that scorns your services.
Let her alone. Speak not of Helena.
Take not her part. For if thou dost intend
Never so little show of love to her,
Thou shalt aby it.
Now follow, if thou dar'st, to try whose right,
Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.
You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.
Nay, go not back.
Nor longer stay in your curst company.
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray.
My legs are longer though, to run away.	
This is thy negligence. Still thou mistak'st,
Or else committ'st thy knaveries willfully.
Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
Did not you tell me I should know the man
By the Athenian garments he had on?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise
That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes;
And so far am I glad it so did sort,
As this their jangling I esteem a sport.
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
Hie, therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
The starry welkin cover thou anon
With drooping fog as black as Acheron,
And lead these testy rivals so astray
As one come not within another's way.
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue;
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong.
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius.
And from each other look thou lead them thus,
Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.
Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye,
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
To take from thence all error with his might
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
When they next wake, all this derision
Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision.
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend,
With league whose date till death shall never end.
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
And then I will her charmed eye release
From monster's view, and all things shall be peace.
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,
And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger,
At whose approach, ghosts wand'ring here and
Troop home to churchyards. Damned spirits all,
That in crossways and floods have burial,
Already to their wormy beds are gone.
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,
They willfully themselves exile from light
And must for aye consort with black-browed night.
But we are spirits of another sort.
And, like a forester, the groves may tread
Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red,
Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,
Turns into yellow gold his salt-green streams.
But notwithstanding, haste! Make no delay.
We may effect this business yet ere day.	
Here comes one.
Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.
Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars,
And wilt not come? Come, recreant! Come, thou
That draws a sword on thee.
Follow my voice. We'll try no manhood here.
He goes before me and still dares me on.
When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
The villain is much lighter-heeled than I.
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
And here will rest me. Come, thou gentle day,
For if but once thou show me thy gray light,
Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com'st thou not?
Abide me, if thou dar'st, for well I wot
Thou runn'st before me, shifting every place,
And dar'st not stand nor look me in the face.
Where art thou now?
Come hither. I am here.
Nay, then, thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this
If ever I thy face by daylight see.
Now go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
To measure out my length on this cold bed.
By day's approach look to be visited.
That I may back to Athens by daylight
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,
Steal me awhile from mine own company.
Never so weary, never so in woe,
Here will I rest me till the break of day.
Heavens shield Lysander if they mean a fray!
Titania, Queen of Fairies, and Bottom and Fairies,
Come, sit thee down upon this flow'ry bed,
And stick muskroses in thy sleek smooth head,
Monsieur Cobweb?
Mustardseed?
Pray you, leave your courtesy, good monsieur.
Cobweb to scratch. I must to the barber's,
What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?
Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.
The squirrel's hoard and fetch thee new nuts.
Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.--
Fairies, begone, and be all ways away.
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
Gently entwist; the female ivy so
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight?
Her dotage now I do begin to pity.
For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
Seeking sweet favors for this hateful fool,
For she his hairy temples then had rounded
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;
And that same dew, which sometime on the buds
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls,
Stood now within the pretty flouriets' eyes,
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
And she in mild terms begged my patience,
Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
To bear him to my bower in Fairyland.
And now I have the boy, I will undo
This hateful imperfection of her eyes.
And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp
From off the head of this Athenian swain,
That he, awaking when the other do,
May all to Athens back again repair
And think no more of this night's accidents
But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
But first I will release the Fairy Queen.
Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen.
My Oberon, what visions have I seen!
Methought I was enamored of an ass.
There lies your love.
Silence awhile.--Robin, take off this head.--
Titania, music call; and strike more dead
Than common sleep of all these five the sense.
Music, ho, music such as charmeth sleep!
Now, when thou wak'st, with thine own fool's eyes
Sound music.	
Come, my queen, take hands with me,
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
Now thou and I are new in amity,
And will tomorrow midnight solemnly
Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly,
And bless it to all fair prosperity.
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.
Hippolyta, Egeus.]
Go, one of you, find out the Forester.
For now our observation is performed,
And, since we have the vaward of the day,
My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.
Dispatch, I say, and find the Forester.
We will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top
And mark the musical confusion
Of hounds and echo in conjunction.
When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear
With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear
Such gallant chiding, for, besides the groves,
The skies, the fountains, every region near
Seemed all one mutual cry. I never heard
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
So flewed, so sanded; and their heads are hung
With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
Crook-kneed, and dewlapped like Thessalian bulls;
Slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells,
Each under each. A cry more tunable
Was never holloed to, nor cheered with horn,
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.
Judge when you hear.--But soft! What nymphs are
My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
And this Lysander; this Demetrius is,
This Helena, old Nedar's Helena.
No doubt they rose up early to observe
The rite of May, and hearing our intent,
Came here in grace of our solemnity.
But speak, Egeus. Is not this the day
That Hermia should give answer of her choice?
Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.
Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past.
Begin these woodbirds but to couple now?
Pardon, my lord.
How comes this gentle concord in the world,
That hatred is so far from jealousy
To sleep by hate and fear no enmity?
My lord, I shall reply amazedly,
Half sleep, half waking. But as yet, I swear,
But, as I think--for truly would I speak,
And now I do bethink me, so it is:
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,
Without the peril of the Athenian law--
Enough, enough!--My lord, you have enough.
They would have stol'n away.--They would,
Demetrius,
Thereby to have defeated you and me:
You of your wife and me of my consent,
Of my consent that she should be your wife.
My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
Of this their purpose hither to this wood,
And I in fury hither followed them,
Fair Helena in fancy following me.
But, my good lord, I wot not by what power
Melted as the snow, seems to me now
As the remembrance of an idle gaud
Which in my childhood I did dote upon,
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
Was I betrothed ere I saw Hermia.
But like a sickness did I loathe this food.
But, as in health, come to my natural taste,
Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
And will forevermore be true to it.
Fair lovers, you are fortunately met.
Of this discourse we more will hear anon.--
Egeus, I will overbear your will,
For in the temple by and by, with us,
These couples shall eternally be knit.--
And, for the morning now is something worn,
Our purposed hunting shall be set aside.
Away with us to Athens. Three and three,
We'll hold a feast in great solemnity.
Come, Hippolyta.
These things seem small and undistinguishable,
Like far-off mountains turned into clouds.
Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
When everything seems double.
And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
Mine own and not mine own.
That we are awake? It seems to me
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
The Duke was here and bid us follow him?
Yea, and my father.
And he did bid us follow to the temple.
Why, then, we are awake. Let's follow him,
And by the way let us recount our dreams.
Hey-ho! Peter Quince! Flute the bellows-mender!
Snout the tinker! Starveling! God's my life! Stolen
Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.
Athenian. I will tell you everything right as it fell
And, most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlic, for
Attendants.]
More strange than true. I never may believe
These antique fables nor these fairy toys.
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
More than cool reason ever comprehends.
The lunatic, the lover, and the poet
Are of imagination all compact.
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold:
That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic,
Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt.
The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from heaven to Earth, from Earth to
And as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing
Such tricks hath strong imagination
That, if it would but apprehend some joy,
It comprehends some bringer of that joy.
Or in the night, imagining some fear,
How easy is a bush supposed a bear!
But all the story of the night told over,
And all their minds transfigured so together,
More witnesseth than fancy's images
And grows to something of great constancy,
But, howsoever, strange and admirable.
Here come the lovers full of joy and mirth.--
Joy, gentle friends! Joy and fresh days of love
Accompany your hearts!
Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!
Come now, what masques, what dances shall we
To wear away this long age of three hours
Between our after-supper and bedtime?
Where is our usual manager of mirth?
What revels are in hand? Is there no play
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
Call Philostrate.
Say what abridgment have you for this evening,
What masque, what music? How shall we beguile
The lazy time if not with some delight?
There is a brief how many sports are ripe.
Make choice of which your Highness will see first.
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp."
We'll none of that. That have I told my love
In glory of my kinsman Hercules.
Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage."
That is an old device, and it was played
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
Of learning, late deceased in beggary."
That is some satire, keen and critical,
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
And his love Thisbe, very tragical mirth."
That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow!
How shall we find the concord of this discord?
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
Which makes it tedious; for in all the play,
There is not one word apt, one player fitted.
And tragical, my noble lord, it is.
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself,
Which, when I saw rehearsed, I must confess,
Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears
The passion of loud laughter never shed.
What are they that do play it?
Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
Which never labored in their minds till now,
And now have toiled their unbreathed memories
With this same play, against your nuptial.
And we will hear it.
It is not for you. I have heard it over,
And it is nothing, nothing in the world,
Unless you can find sport in their intents,
Extremely stretched and conned with cruel pain
To do you service.
For never anything can be amiss
When simpleness and duty tender it.
Go, bring them in--and take your places, ladies.
And duty in his service perishing.
Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.
He says they can do nothing in this kind.
The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
Our sport shall be to take what they mistake;
And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
Takes it in might, not merit.
Where I have come, great clerks have purposed
To greet me with premeditated welcomes,
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
Make periods in the midst of sentences,
Throttle their practiced accent in their fears,
And in conclusion dumbly have broke off,
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,
Out of this silence yet I picked a welcome,
And in the modesty of fearful duty,
Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
In least speak most, to my capacity.
So please your Grace, the Prologue is addressed.
If we offend, it is with our goodwill.
But with goodwill. To show our simple skill,
Consider, then, we come but in despite.
Our true intent is. All for your delight
The actors are at hand, and, by their show,
You shall know all that you are like to know.
Wall , and Lion
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show.
This man is Pyramus, if you would know.
This man with lime and roughcast doth present
And through Wall's chink, poor souls, they are
This man, with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn,
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
This grisly beast 
Did scare away or rather did affright;
And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall,
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,
Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade,
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain
At large discourse, while here they do remain.
In this same interlude it doth befall
That I, one Snout by name, present a wall;
And such a wall as I would have you think
That had in it a crannied hole or chink,
Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe,
Did whisper often, very secretly.
This loam, this roughcast, and this stone doth show
That I am that same wall. The truth is so.
And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
Thanks, courteous wall. Jove shield thee well for
My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones,
Thisbe?
My love! Thou art my love, I think.
And, like Limander, am I trusty still.
And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.
Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway?
Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so,
And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.	
You ladies, you whose gentle hearts do fear
May now perchance both quake and tremble here,
Then know that I, as Snug the joiner, am
For if I should as lion come in strife
Into this place, 'twere pity on my life.
Leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the
Moon.
This lanthorn doth the horned moon present.
This lanthorn doth the horned moon present.
Myself the man i' th' moon do seem to be.
This is old Ninny's tomb. Where is my love?
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams.
For by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams,
Which is--no, no--which was the fairest dame
Thisbe comes back and finds her lover?
Here she comes, and her passion ends the play.
Epilogue or to hear a Bergomask dance between
But, come, your Bergomask. Let your
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
Lovers, to bed! 'Tis almost fairy time.
As much as we this night have overwatched.
This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled
The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
In nightly revels and new jollity.	
Salisbury, with the Chatillion of France.]
Now say, Chatillion, what would France with us?
Thus, after greeting, speaks the King of France
In my behavior to the majesty,
The borrowed majesty, of England here.
Silence, good mother. Hear the embassy.
Philip of France, in right and true behalf
Of thy deceased brother Geoffrey's son,
Arthur Plantagenet, lays most lawful claim
To this fair island and the territories,
To Ireland, Poitiers, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
Desiring thee to lay aside the sword
Which sways usurpingly these several titles,
And put the same into young Arthur's hand,
Thy nephew and right royal sovereign.
What follows if we disallow of this?
The proud control of fierce and bloody war,
To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld.
Here have we war for war and blood for blood,
Controlment for controlment: so answer France.
Then take my king's defiance from my mouth,
The farthest limit of my embassy.
Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace.
Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France,
For ere thou canst report, I will be there;
The thunder of my cannon shall be heard.
So, hence. Be thou the trumpet of our wrath
And sullen presage of your own decay.--
An honorable conduct let him have.
Pembroke, look to 't.--Farewell, Chatillion.
What now, my son! Have I not ever said
How that ambitious Constance would not cease
Till she had kindled France and all the world
Upon the right and party of her son?
This might have been prevented and made whole
With very easy arguments of love,
Which now the manage of two kingdoms must
With fearful bloody issue arbitrate.
Our strong possession and our right for us.
Your strong possession much more than your right,
Or else it must go wrong with you and me--
So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
Which none but God and you and I shall hear.
My liege, here is the strangest controversy
Come from the country to be judged by you
That e'er I heard. Shall I produce the men?
Our abbeys and our priories shall pay
This expedition's charge.
What men are you?
Your faithful subject I, a gentleman,
Born in Northamptonshire, and eldest son,
As I suppose, to Robert Faulconbridge,
Of Coeur de Lion knighted in the field.
The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge.
Is that the elder, and art thou the heir?
You came not of one mother then, it seems.
Most certain of one mother, mighty king--
That is well known--and, as I think, one father.
But for the certain knowledge of that truth
Of that I doubt, as all men's children may.
Out on thee, rude man! Thou dost shame thy
And wound her honor with this diffidence.
That is my brother's plea, and none of mine,
The which if he can prove, he pops me out
At least from fair five hundred pound a year.
Heaven guard my mother's honor and my land!
Doth he lay claim to thine inheritance?
But once he slandered me with bastardy.
But whe'er I be as true begot or no,
That still I lay upon my mother's head.
But that I am as well begot, my liege--
Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me!--
Compare our faces and be judge yourself.
If old Sir Robert did beget us both
And were our father, and this son like him,
Why, what a madcap hath heaven lent us here!
He hath a trick of Coeur de Lion's face;
The accent of his tongue affecteth him.
Do you not read some tokens of my son
In the large composition of this man?
Mine eye hath well examined his parts
And finds them perfect Richard. 
Faulconbridge] Sirrah, speak.
What doth move you to claim your brother's land?
Because he hath a half-face, like my father.
With half that face would he have all my land--
My gracious liege, when that my father lived,
Your brother did employ my father much--
Well, sir, by this you cannot get my land.
Your tale must be how he employed my mother.
And once dispatched him in an embassy
To Germany, there with the Emperor
To treat of high affairs touching that time.
Th' advantage of his absence took the King
And in the meantime sojourned at my father's;
Where how he did prevail I shame to speak.
But truth is truth: large lengths of seas and shores
Between my father and my mother lay,
As I have heard my father speak himself,
When this same lusty gentleman was got.
Upon his deathbed he by will bequeathed
His lands to me, and took it on his death
That this my mother's son was none of his;
An if he were, he came into the world
Full fourteen weeks before the course of time.
Then, good my liege, let me have what is mine,
My father's land, as was my father's will.
Sirrah, your brother is legitimate.
Your father's wife did after wedlock bear him,
An if she did play false, the fault was hers,
Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands
That marry wives. Tell me, how if my brother,
Who as you say took pains to get this son,
Had of your father claimed this son for his?
In sooth, good friend, your father might have kept
This calf, bred from his cow, from all the world;
In sooth he might. Then if he were my brother's,
My brother might not claim him, nor your father,
Being none of his, refuse him. This concludes:
My mother's son did get your father's heir;
Your father's heir must have your father's land.
Shall then my father's will be of no force
To dispossess that child which is not his?
Of no more force to dispossess me, sir,
Than was his will to get me, as I think.
Whether hadst thou rather: be a Faulconbridge
And, like thy brother, to enjoy thy land,
Or the reputed son of Coeur de Lion,
Lord of thy presence, and no land besides?
Madam, an if my brother had my shape
And I had his, Sir Robert's his like him,
And if my legs were two such riding-rods,
My arms such eel-skins stuffed, my face so thin
That in mine ear I durst not stick a rose,
Lest men should say "Look where three-farthings
And, to his shape, were heir to all this land,
Would I might never stir from off this place,
Bequeath thy land to him, and follow me?
Brother, take you my land. I'll take my chance.
Your face hath got five hundred pound a year,
Yet sell your face for five pence and 'tis dear.--
Madam, I'll follow you unto the death.
Nay, I would have you go before me thither.
Our country manners give our betters way.
Philip, my liege, so is my name begun,
Philip, good old Sir Robert's wife's eldest son.
From henceforth bear his name whose form thou
Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great.
Arise Sir Richard and Plantagenet.
Brother by th' mother's side, give me your hand.
My father gave me honor, yours gave land.
Now blessed be the hour, by night or day,
When I was got, Sir Robert was away!
The very spirit of Plantagenet!
Madam, by chance but not by truth. What though?
Something about, a little from the right,
Who dares not stir by day must walk by night,
Near or far off, well won is still well shot,
And I am I, howe'er I was begot.
Go, Faulconbridge, now hast thou thy desire.
Come, madam,--and come, Richard. We must
For France, for France, for it is more than need.
Brother, adieu, good fortune come to thee,
For thou wast got i' th' way of honesty.
But many a many foot of land the worse.
Well, now can I make any Joan a lady.
An if his name be George, I'll call him "Peter,"
For new-made honor doth forget men's names;
For your conversion. Now your traveler,
He and his toothpick at my Worship's mess,
And when my knightly stomach is sufficed,
Why then I suck my teeth and catechize
My picked man of countries: "My dear sir,"
Thus leaning on mine elbow I begin,
And then comes Answer like an absey-book:
At your employment, at your service, sir."
And so, ere Answer knows what Question would,
Saving in dialogue of compliment
And talking of the Alps and Apennines,
The Pyrenean and the river Po,
It draws toward supper in conclusion so.
But this is worshipful society
And fits the mounting spirit like myself;
For he is but a bastard to the time
That doth not smack of observation,
And so am I whether I smack or no;
And not alone in habit and device,
Exterior form, outward accouterment,
But from the inward motion to deliver
Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age's tooth,
Which though I will not practice to deceive,
Yet to avoid deceit I mean to learn,
For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising.
But who comes in such haste in riding robes?
What woman post is this? Hath she no husband
That will take pains to blow a horn before her?
What brings you here to court so hastily?
Where is that slave thy brother? Where is he
That holds in chase mine honor up and down?
My brother Robert, old Sir Robert's son?
Colbrand the Giant, that same mighty man?
Is it Sir Robert's son that you seek so?
Sir Robert's son. Why scorn'st thou at Sir Robert?
He is Sir Robert's son, and so art thou.
James Gurney, wilt thou give us leave awhile?
Good leave, good Philip.
There's toys abroad. Anon I'll tell thee more.
Madam, I was not old Sir Robert's son.
Sir Robert might have eat his part in me
Upon Good Friday and ne'er broke his fast.
Sir Robert could do well--marry, to confess--
Could he get me. Sir Robert could not do it;
We know his handiwork. Therefore, good mother,
To whom am I beholding for these limbs?
Sir Robert never holp to make this leg.
Hast thou conspired with thy brother too,
That for thine own gain shouldst defend mine
What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave?
Knight, knight, good mother, Basilisco-like.
What, I am dubbed! I have it on my shoulder.
But, mother, I am not Sir Robert's son.
Legitimation, name, and all is gone.
Then, good my mother, let me know my father--
Some proper man, I hope. Who was it, mother?
Hast thou denied thyself a Faulconbridge?
As faithfully as I deny the devil.
King Richard Coeur de Lion was thy father.
By long and vehement suit I was seduced
To make room for him in my husband's bed.
Heaven lay not my transgression to my charge!
Thou art the issue of my dear offense,
Which was so strongly urged past my defense.
Now, by this light, were I to get again,
Madam, I would not wish a better father.
Some sins do bear their privilege on Earth,
And so doth yours. Your fault was not your folly.
Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose,
Subjected tribute to commanding love,
Against whose fury and unmatched force
The aweless lion could not wage the fight,
Nor keep his princely heart from Richard's hand.
He that perforce robs lions of their hearts
May easily win a woman's. Ay, my mother,
With all my heart I thank thee for my father.
Who lives and dares but say thou didst not well
When I was got, I'll send his soul to hell.
Come, lady, I will show thee to my kin,
If thou hadst said him nay, it had been sin.
King of France, Louis the Dauphin, Constance, Arthur,
Before Angiers well met, brave Austria.--
Arthur, that great forerunner of thy blood,
Richard, that robbed the lion of his heart
And fought the holy wars in Palestine,
By this brave duke came early to his grave.
And, for amends to his posterity,
At our importance hither is he come
To spread his colors, boy, in thy behalf,
And to rebuke the usurpation
Of thy unnatural uncle, English John.
Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.
God shall forgive you Coeur de Lion's death
The rather that you give his offspring life,
Shadowing their right under your wings of war.
But with a heart full of unstained love.
Welcome before the gates of Angiers, duke.
Upon thy cheek lay I this zealous kiss
As seal to this indenture of my love:
That to my home I will no more return
Till Angiers and the right thou hast in France,
Together with that pale, that white-faced shore,
Whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides
And coops from other lands her islanders,
Even till that England, hedged in with the main,
That water-walled bulwark, still secure
And confident from foreign purposes,
Even till that utmost corner of the West
Salute thee for her king. Till then, fair boy,
Will I not think of home, but follow arms.
Till your strong hand shall help to give him strength
To make a more requital to your love.
The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords
In such a just and charitable war.
Well, then, to work. Our cannon shall be bent
Against the brows of this resisting town.
Call for our chiefest men of discipline
To cull the plots of best advantages.
We'll lay before this town our royal bones,
Wade to the marketplace in Frenchmen's blood,
But we will make it subject to this boy.
Stay for an answer to your embassy,
Lest unadvised you stain your swords with blood.
My lord Chatillion may from England bring
That right in peace which here we urge in war,
And then we shall repent each drop of blood
That hot rash haste so indirectly shed.
Our messenger Chatillion is arrived.--
What England says say briefly, gentle lord.
We coldly pause for thee. Chatillion, speak.
Then turn your forces from this paltry siege
And stir them up against a mightier task.
England, impatient of your just demands,
Hath put himself in arms. The adverse winds,
Whose leisure I have stayed, have given him time
To land his legions all as soon as I.
His marches are expedient to this town,
His forces strong, his soldiers confident.
With him along is come the Mother Queen,
An Ate stirring him to blood and strife;
With her her niece, the Lady Blanche of Spain;
With them a bastard of the King's deceased.
And all th' unsettled humors of the land--
Rash, inconsiderate, fiery voluntaries,
With ladies' faces and fierce dragons' spleens--
Have sold their fortunes at their native homes,
Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs,
To make a hazard of new fortunes here.
In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits
Than now the English bottoms have waft o'er
Did never float upon the swelling tide
To do offense and scathe in Christendom.
The interruption of their churlish drums
Cuts off more circumstance. They are at hand,
To parley or to fight, therefore prepare.
How much unlooked-for is this expedition.
By how much unexpected, by so much
We must awake endeavor for defense,
For courage mounteth with occasion.
Let them be welcome, then. We are prepared.
Eleanor, Blanche, Salisbury, Pembroke, and others.]
Peace be to France, if France in peace permit
Our just and lineal entrance to our own.
If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven,
Whiles we, God's wrathful agent, do correct
Their proud contempt that beats his peace to heaven.
Peace be to England, if that war return
From France to England, there to live in peace.
England we love, and for that England's sake
With burden of our armor here we sweat.
This toil of ours should be a work of thine;
But thou from loving England art so far
That thou hast underwrought his lawful king,
Cut off the sequence of posterity,
Outfaced infant state, and done a rape
Upon the maiden virtue of the crown.
Look here upon thy brother Geoffrey's face.
These eyes, these brows, were molded out of his;
This little abstract doth contain that large
Which died in Geoffrey, and the hand of time
Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume.
That Geoffrey was thy elder brother born,
And this his son. England was Geoffrey's right,
And this is Geoffrey's. In the name of God,
How comes it then that thou art called a king,
When living blood doth in these temples beat
Which owe the crown that thou o'ermasterest?
From whom hast thou this great commission,
France,
To draw my answer from thy articles?
From that supernal judge that stirs good thoughts
In any breast of strong authority
To look into the blots and stains of right.
That judge hath made me guardian to this boy,
Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong,
And by whose help I mean to chastise it.
Alack, thou dost usurp authority.
Excuse it is to beat usurping down.
Who is it thou dost call usurper, France?
Let me make answer: thy usurping son.
Out, insolent! Thy bastard shall be king
That thou mayst be a queen and check the world.
My bed was ever to thy son as true
As thine was to thy husband, and this boy
Liker in feature to his father Geoffrey
Than thou and John, in manners being as like
As rain to water or devil to his dam.
My boy a bastard? By my soul, I think
His father never was so true begot.
It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother.
There's a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.
There's a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.
Peace!
One that will play the devil, sir, with you,
An he may catch your hide and you alone.
You are the hare of whom the proverb goes,
Whose valor plucks dead lions by the beard.
Sirrah, look to 't. I' faith, I will, i' faith!
That did disrobe the lion of that robe.
It lies as sightly on the back of him
As great Alcides' shoes upon an ass.--
But, ass, I'll take that burden from your back
Or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack.
What cracker is this same that deafs our ears
With this abundance of superfluous breath?
Louis, determine what we shall do straight.
Women and fools, break off your conference.--
King John, this is the very sum of all:
England and Ireland, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
In right of Arthur do I claim of thee.
Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms?
My life as soon! I do defy thee, France.--
Arthur of Brittany, yield thee to my hand,
And out of my dear love I'll give thee more
Than e'er the coward hand of France can win.
Submit thee, boy.
Do, child, go to it grandam, child.
Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will
Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig.
There's a good grandam.
His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps.
Now shame upon you whe'er she does or no!
His grandam's wrongs, and not his mother's
Draws those heaven-moving pearls from his poor
Which heaven shall take in nature of a fee.
Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be bribed
To do him justice and revenge on you.
Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and Earth!
Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and Earth,
Call not me slanderer. Thou and thine usurp
The dominations, royalties, and rights
Of this oppressed boy. This is thy eldest son's son,
Infortunate in nothing but in thee.
Thy sins are visited in this poor child.
The canon of the law is laid on him,
Being but the second generation
Removed from thy sin-conceiving womb.
Bedlam, have done.
That he is not only plagued for her sin,
But God hath made her sin and her the plague
On this removed issue, plagued for her,
And with her plague; her sin his injury,
Her injury the beadle to her sin,
All punished in the person of this child
And all for her. A plague upon her!
Thou unadvised scold, I can produce
Ay, who doubts that? A will--a wicked will,
Peace, lady. Pause, or be more temperate.
It ill beseems this presence to cry aim
To these ill-tuned repetitions.--
Some trumpet summon hither to the walls
These men of Angiers. Let us hear them speak
Whose title they admit, Arthur's or John's.
Who is it that hath warned us to the walls?
You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects--
You loving men of Angiers, Arthur's subjects,
Our trumpet called you to this gentle parle--
For our advantage. Therefore hear us first.
These flags of France that are advanced here
Before the eye and prospect of your town,
Have hither marched to your endamagement.
The cannons have their bowels full of wrath,
And ready mounted are they to spit forth
Their iron indignation 'gainst your walls.
All preparation for a bloody siege
And merciless proceeding by these French
Confronts your city's eyes, your winking gates,
And, but for our approach, those sleeping stones,
That as a waist doth girdle you about,
By the compulsion of their ordinance
By this time from their fixed beds of lime
Had been dishabited, and wide havoc made
For bloody power to rush upon your peace.
But on the sight of us your lawful king,
Who painfully with much expedient march
Have brought a countercheck before your gates
To save unscratched your city's threatened cheeks,
Behold, the French, amazed, vouchsafe a parle.
And now, instead of bullets wrapped in fire
To make a shaking fever in your walls,
They shoot but calm words folded up in smoke
To make a faithless error in your ears,
Which trust accordingly, kind citizens,
And let us in. Your king, whose labored spirits
Forwearied in this action of swift speed,
Craves harborage within your city walls.
When I have said, make answer to us both.
Lo, in this right hand, whose protection
Is most divinely vowed upon the right
Of him it holds, stands young Plantagenet,
Son to the elder brother of this man,
And king o'er him and all that he enjoys.
For this downtrodden equity we tread
In warlike march these greens before your town,
Being no further enemy to you
Than the constraint of hospitable zeal
In the relief of this oppressed child
Religiously provokes. Be pleased then
To pay that duty which you truly owe
To him that owes it, namely, this young prince,
And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear
Save in aspect, hath all offense sealed up.
Our cannons' malice vainly shall be spent
Against th' invulnerable clouds of heaven,
And with a blessed and unvexed retire,
With unbacked swords and helmets all unbruised,
We will bear home that lusty blood again
Which here we came to spout against your town,
And leave your children, wives, and you in peace.
But if you fondly pass our proffered offer,
Can hide you from our messengers of war,
Though all these English and their discipline
Were harbored in their rude circumference.
Then tell us, shall your city call us lord
In that behalf which we have challenged it?
Or shall we give the signal to our rage
And stalk in blood to our possession?
In brief, we are the King of England's subjects.
For him, and in his right, we hold this town.
Acknowledge then the King and let me in.
That can we not. But he that proves the King,
To him will we prove loyal. Till that time
Have we rammed up our gates against the world.
Doth not the crown of England prove the King?
And if not that, I bring you witnesses,
Twice fifteen thousand hearts of England's breed--
To verify our title with their lives.
As many and as wellborn bloods as those--
Stand in his face to contradict his claim.
Till you compound whose right is worthiest,
We for the worthiest hold the right from both.
Then God forgive the sin of all those souls
That to their everlasting residence,
Before the dew of evening fall, shall fleet
In dreadful trial of our kingdom's king.
Amen, amen.--Mount, chevaliers! To arms!
Saint George, that swinged the dragon and e'er
Sits on 's horseback at mine hostess' door,
Teach us some fence!  Sirrah, were I at
At your den, sirrah, with your lioness,
And make a monster of you.
Up higher to the plain, where we'll set forth
In best appointment all our regiments.
Speed, then, to take advantage of the field.
It shall be so, and at the other hill
Command the rest to stand. God and our right!
Trumpets, to the gates.]
You men of Angiers, open wide your gates,
And let young Arthur, Duke of Brittany, in,
Who by the hand of France this day hath made
Much work for tears in many an English mother,
Whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground.
Many a widow's husband groveling lies
Coldly embracing the discolored earth,
And victory with little loss doth play
Upon the dancing banners of the French,
Who are at hand, triumphantly displayed,
To enter conquerors and to proclaim
Arthur of Brittany England's king and yours.
Rejoice, you men of Angiers, ring your bells!
King John, your king and England's, doth approach,
Commander of this hot malicious day.
Their armors, that marched hence so silver bright,
Hither return all gilt with Frenchmen's blood.
There stuck no plume in any English crest
That is removed by a staff of France.
Our colors do return in those same hands
That did display them when we first marched forth,
And like a jolly troop of huntsmen come
Our lusty English, all with purpled hands,
Dyed in the dying slaughter of their foes.
Open your gates, and give the victors way.
Heralds, from off our towers we might behold
From first to last the onset and retire
Of both your armies, whose equality
By our best eyes cannot be censured.
Blood hath bought blood, and blows have answered
Strength matched with strength, and power
Both are alike, and both alike we like.
One must prove greatest. While they weigh so even,
We hold our town for neither, yet for both.
Bastard, Queen Eleanor, Blanche, and Salisbury;
Austria, and Louis the Dauphin), at several doors.]
France, hast thou yet more blood to cast away?
Say, shall the current of our right roam on,
Whose passage, vexed with thy impediment,
Shall leave his native channel and o'erswell
With course disturbed even thy confining shores,
Unless thou let his silver water keep
England, thou hast not saved one drop of blood
In this hot trial more than we of France,
Rather lost more. And by this hand I swear
That sways the earth this climate overlooks,
Before we will lay down our just-borne arms,
We'll put thee down, 'gainst whom these arms we
Or add a royal number to the dead,
Gracing the scroll that tells of this war's loss
With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.
Ha, majesty! How high thy glory towers
When the rich blood of kings is set on fire!
The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his fangs,
And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men
In undetermined differences of kings.
Why stand these royal fronts amazed thus?
Cry havoc, kings! Back to the stained field,
You equal potents, fiery-kindled spirits.
Then let confusion of one part confirm
The other's peace. Till then, blows, blood, and
Whose party do the townsmen yet admit?
Speak, citizens, for England. Who's your king?
The King of England, when we know the King.
Know him in us, that here hold up his right.
In us, that are our own great deputy
And bear possession of our person here,
Lord of our presence, Angiers, and of you.
And till it be undoubted, we do lock
Our former scruple in our strong-barred gates,
Kings of our fear, until our fears resolved
Be by some certain king purged and deposed.
By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings,
And stand securely on their battlements
As in a theater, whence they gape and point
At your industrious scenes and acts of death.
Your royal presences, be ruled by me:
Do like the mutines of Jerusalem,
Be friends awhile, and both conjointly bend
Your sharpest deeds of malice on this town.
By east and west let France and England mount
Their battering cannon charged to the mouths,
Till their soul-fearing clamors have brawled down
The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city.
Even till unfenced desolation
Leave them as naked as the vulgar air.
That done, dissever your united strengths
And part your mingled colors once again;
Turn face to face and bloody point to point.
Then in a moment Fortune shall cull forth
Out of one side her happy minion,
To whom in favor she shall give the day
And kiss him with a glorious victory.
How like you this wild counsel, mighty states?
Smacks it not something of the policy?
Now by the sky that hangs above our heads,
And lay this Angiers even with the ground,
Then after fight who shall be king of it?
An if thou hast the mettle of a king,
Being wronged as we are by this peevish town,
Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,
As we will ours, against these saucy walls,
And when that we have dashed them to the ground,
Why, then, defy each other and pell-mell
Make work upon ourselves, for heaven or hell.
Let it be so. Say, where will you assault?
We from the west will send destruction
Into this city's bosom.
Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town.
Austria and France shoot in each other's mouth.
Hear us, great kings. Vouchsafe awhile to stay,
And I shall show you peace and fair-faced league,
Win you this city without stroke or wound,
Rescue those breathing lives to die in beds
That here come sacrifices for the field.
Persever not, but hear me, mighty kings.
Speak on with favor. We are bent to hear.
That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanche,
Is near to England. Look upon the years
Of Louis the Dauphin and that lovely maid.
If lusty love should go in quest of beauty,
Where should he find it fairer than in Blanche?
If zealous love should go in search of virtue,
Where should he find it purer than in Blanche?
If love ambitious sought a match of birth,
Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady
Blanche?
Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth,
Is the young Dauphin every way complete.
If not complete of, say he is not she,
And she again wants nothing, to name want,
If want it be not that she is not he.
He is the half part of a blessed man,
Left to be finished by such as she,
And she a fair divided excellence,
Whose fullness of perfection lies in him.
Do glorify the banks that bound them in,
And two such shores to two such streams made one,
Two such controlling bounds shall you be, kings,
To these two princes, if you marry them.
This union shall do more than battery can
To our fast-closed gates, for at this match,
With swifter spleen than powder can enforce,
The mouth of passage shall we fling wide ope
And give you entrance. But without this match,
The sea enraged is not half so deaf,
Lions more confident, mountains and rocks
More free from motion, no, not Death himself
In mortal fury half so peremptory
As we to keep this city.
That shakes the rotten carcass of old Death
Out of his rags! Here's a large mouth indeed
That spits forth death and mountains, rocks and
Talks as familiarly of roaring lions
As maids of thirteen do of puppy dogs.
What cannoneer begot this lusty blood?
He speaks plain cannon fire, and smoke, and
He gives the bastinado with his tongue.
Our ears are cudgeled. Not a word of his
But buffets better than a fist of France.
Zounds, I was never so bethumped with words
Since I first called my brother's father Dad.
Son, list to this conjunction; make this match.
Give with our niece a dowry large enough,
For by this knot thou shalt so surely tie
Thy now unsured assurance to the crown
That yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe
The bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit.
Mark how they whisper. Urge them while their
Are capable of this ambition,
Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath
Of soft petitions, pity, and remorse,
Cool and congeal again to what it was.
Why answer not the double majesties
This friendly treaty of our threatened town?
Speak England first, that hath been forward first
To speak unto this city. What say you?
If that the Dauphin there, thy princely son,
Can in this book of beauty read "I love,"
Her dowry shall weigh equal with a queen.
For Anjou and fair Touraine, Maine, Poitiers,
And all that we upon this side the sea--
Except this city now by us besieged--
Find liable to our crown and dignity,
Shall gild her bridal bed and make her rich
In titles, honors, and promotions,
As she in beauty, education, blood,
Holds hand with any princess of the world.
What sayst thou, boy? Look in the lady's face.
The shadow of myself formed in her eye,
Which, being but the shadow of your son,
Becomes a sun and makes your son a shadow.
Till now infixed I beheld myself
Drawn in the flattering table of her eye.
And quartered in her heart! He doth espy
That hanged and drawn and quartered there should
In such a love so vile a lout as he.
My uncle's will in this respect is mine.
If he see aught in you that makes him like,
That anything he sees which moves his liking
Or if you will, to speak more properly,
Further I will not flatter you, my lord,
That all I see in you is worthy love,
Than this: that nothing do I see in you,
Though churlish thoughts themselves should be
That I can find should merit any hate.
What say these young ones? What say you, my
That she is bound in honor still to do
What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.
Speak then, Prince Dauphin. Can you love this lady?
Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love,
For I do love her most unfeignedly.
Then do I give Volquessen, Touraine, Maine,
Poitiers and Anjou, these five provinces
With her to thee, and this addition more:
Full thirty thousand marks of English coin.--
Philip of France, if thou be pleased withal,
Command thy son and daughter to join hands.
It likes us well.--Young princes, close your hands.
And your lips too, for I am well assured
That I did so when I was first assured.
Now, citizens of Angiers, ope your gates.
Let in that amity which you have made,
For at Saint Mary's Chapel presently
The rites of marriage shall be solemnized.--
Is not the Lady Constance in this troop?
Her presence would have interrupted much.
Where is she and her son? Tell me, who knows.
She is sad and passionate at your Highness' tent.
And by my faith, this league that we have made
Will give her sadness very little cure.--
Brother of England, how may we content
This widow lady? In her right we came,
Which we, God knows, have turned another way
To our own vantage.
For we'll create young Arthur Duke of Brittany
And Earl of Richmond, and this rich, fair town
We make him lord of.--Call the Lady Constance.
Some speedy messenger bid her repair
To our solemnity.  I trust we
If not fill up the measure of her will,
Yet in some measure satisfy her so
That we shall stop her exclamation.
Go we as well as haste will suffer us
To this unlooked-for, unprepared pomp.
Mad world, mad kings, mad composition!
John, to stop Arthur's title in the whole,
Hath willingly departed with a part;
And France, whose armor conscience buckled on,
Whom zeal and charity brought to the field
As God's own soldier, rounded in the ear
With that same purpose-changer, that sly devil,
That broker that still breaks the pate of faith,
That daily break-vow, he that wins of all,
Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids--
Who having no external thing to lose
But the word "maid," cheats the poor maid of
That smooth-faced gentleman, tickling Commodity,
Commodity, the bias of the world--
The world, who of itself is peised well,
Made to run even upon even ground,
Till this advantage, this vile-drawing bias,
This sway of motion, this Commodity,
Makes it take head from all indifferency,
From all direction, purpose, course, intent.
And this same bias, this Commodity,
This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word,
Clapped on the outward eye of fickle France,
Hath drawn him from his own determined aid,
From a resolved and honorable war
To a most base and vile-concluded peace.
And why rail I on this Commodity?
But for because he hath not wooed me yet.
Not that I have the power to clutch my hand
When his fair angels would salute my palm,
But for my hand, as unattempted yet,
Like a poor beggar raileth on the rich.
Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail
And say there is no sin but to be rich;
And being rich, my virtue then shall be
To say there is no vice but beggary.
Since kings break faith upon Commodity,
Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee!
Gone to be married? Gone to swear a peace?
False blood to false blood joined? Gone to be friends?
Shall Louis have Blanche and Blanche those
It is not so. Thou hast misspoke, misheard.
Be well advised; tell o'er thy tale again.
It cannot be; thou dost but say 'tis so.
Is but the vain breath of a common man.
Believe me, I do not believe thee, man.
Thou shalt be punished for thus flighting me,
For I am sick and capable of fears,
Oppressed with wrongs and therefore full of fears,
And though thou now confess thou didst but jest,
With my vexed spirits I cannot take a truce,
But they will quake and tremble all this day.
What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head?
Why dost thou look so sadly on my son?
What means that hand upon that breast of thine?
Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum,
Like a proud river peering o'er his bounds?
Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words?
Then speak again--not all thy former tale,
But this one word, whether thy tale be true.
As true as I believe you think them false
That give you cause to prove my saying true.
Teach thou this sorrow how to make me die,
And let belief and life encounter so
As doth the fury of two desperate men
Which in the very meeting fall and die.
Louis marry Blanche?--O, boy, then where art
France friend with England? What becomes of me?
Fellow, be gone. I cannot brook thy sight.
This news hath made thee a most ugly man.
What other harm have I, good lady, done
But spoke the harm that is by others done?
Which harm within itself so heinous is
As it makes harmful all that speak of it.
If thou that bidd'st me be content wert grim,
Ugly, and sland'rous to thy mother's womb,
Full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains,
Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious,
Patched with foul moles and eye-offending marks,
For then I should not love thee; no, nor thou
Become thy great birth, nor deserve a crown.
But thou art fair, and at thy birth, dear boy,
Nature and Fortune joined to make thee great.
Of Nature's gifts thou mayst with lilies boast,
And with the half-blown rose. But Fortune, O,
She is corrupted, changed, and won from thee;
Sh' adulterates hourly with thine Uncle John,
And with her golden hand hath plucked on France
To tread down fair respect of sovereignty,
And made his majesty the bawd to theirs.
France is a bawd to Fortune and King John,
That strumpet Fortune, that usurping John.--
Tell me, thou fellow, is not France forsworn?
Envenom him with words, or get thee gone
And leave those woes alone which I alone
Am bound to underbear.
Thou mayst, thou shalt, I will not go with thee.
For grief is proud and makes his owner stoop.
To me and to the state of my great grief
Let kings assemble, for my grief 's so great
That no supporter but the huge firm Earth
Can hold it up. Here I and sorrows sit.
Here is my throne; bid kings come bow to it.
France, Louis the Dauphin, Blanche, Queen Eleanor,
Bastard, Austria, and Attendants.]
Ever in France shall be kept festival.
To solemnize this day the glorious sun
Stays in his course and plays the alchemist,
Turning with splendor of his precious eye
The meager cloddy earth to glittering gold.
The yearly course that brings this day about
Shall never see it but a holy day.
What hath this day deserved? What hath it done
That it in golden letters should be set
Among the high tides in the calendar?
Nay, rather turn this day out of the week,
This day of shame, oppression, perjury.
Or if it must stand still, let wives with child
Pray that their burdens may not fall this day,
Lest that their hopes prodigiously be crossed.
But on this day let seamen fear no wrack;
No bargains break that are not this day made;
This day, all things begun come to ill end,
Yea, faith itself to hollow falsehood change!
By heaven, lady, you shall have no cause
To curse the fair proceedings of this day.
Have I not pawned to you my majesty?
You have beguiled me with a counterfeit
Resembling majesty, which, being touched and tried,
Proves valueless. You are forsworn, forsworn.
You came in arms to spill mine enemies' blood,
But now in arms you strengthen it with yours.
The grappling vigor and rough frown of war
Is cold in amity and painted peace,
And our oppression hath made up this league.
Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjured
Let not the hours of this ungodly day
Wear out the days in peace, but ere sunset
Set armed discord 'twixt these perjured kings.
Hear me, O, hear me!
War, war, no peace! Peace is to me a war.
That bloody spoil. Thou slave, thou wretch, thou
Thou little valiant, great in villainy,
Thou ever strong upon the stronger side,
Thou Fortune's champion, that dost never fight
But when her humorous Ladyship is by
To teach thee safety. Thou art perjured too,
And sooth'st up greatness. What a fool art thou,
Upon my party. Thou cold-blooded slave,
Hast thou not spoke like thunder on my side?
Been sworn my soldier, bidding me depend
Upon thy stars, thy fortune, and thy strength?
And dost thou now fall over to my foes?
Thou wear a lion's hide! Doff it for shame,
And hang a calfskin on those recreant limbs.
Thou dar'st not say so, villain, for thy life!
We like not this. Thou dost forget thyself.
Here comes the holy legate of the Pope.
Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven!
To thee, King John, my holy errand is.
And from Pope Innocent the legate here,
Do in his name religiously demand
Why thou against the Church, our holy mother,
So willfully dost spurn, and force perforce
Keep Stephen Langton, chosen Archbishop
Of Canterbury, from that Holy See.
This, in our foresaid Holy Father's name,
Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.
What earthy name to interrogatories
Can task the free breath of a sacred king?
Thou canst not, cardinal, devise a name
So slight, unworthy, and ridiculous
To charge me to an answer, as the Pope.
Tell him this tale, and from the mouth of England
Add thus much more, that no Italian priest
Shall tithe or toll in our dominions;
But as we under God are supreme head,
So, under Him, that great supremacy
Where we do reign we will alone uphold
Without th' assistance of a mortal hand.
So tell the Pope, all reverence set apart
To him and his usurped authority.
Brother of England, you blaspheme in this.
Though you and all the kings of Christendom
Are led so grossly by this meddling priest,
Dreading the curse that money may buy out,
And by the merit of vile gold, dross, dust,
Purchase corrupted pardon of a man
Who in that sale sells pardon from himself,
Though you and all the rest, so grossly led,
This juggling witchcraft with revenue cherish,
Yet I alone, alone do me oppose
Against the Pope, and count his friends my foes.
Then, by the lawful power that I have,
Thou shalt stand cursed and excommunicate;
And blessed shall he be that doth revolt
From his allegiance to an heretic;
And meritorious shall that hand be called,
Canonized and worshiped as a saint,
That takes away by any secret course
Thy hateful life.
That I have room with Rome to curse awhile!
Good father cardinal, cry thou "Amen"
To my keen curses, for without my wrong
There is no tongue hath power to curse him right.
There's law and warrant, lady, for my curse.
And for mine, too. When law can do no right,
Let it be lawful that law bar no wrong.
Law cannot give my child his kingdom here,
For he that holds his kingdom holds the law.
Therefore, since law itself is perfect wrong,
How can the law forbid my tongue to curse?
Philip of France, on peril of a curse,
Let go the hand of that arch-heretic,
And raise the power of France upon his head
Unless he do submit himself to Rome.
Look'st thou pale, France? Do not let go thy hand.
Look to that, devil, lest that France repent
And by disjoining hands, hell lose a soul.
King Philip, listen to the Cardinal.
And hang a calfskin on his recreant limbs.
Well, ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs,
Because--
Philip, what sayst thou to the Cardinal?
What should he say, but as the Cardinal?
Bethink you, father, for the difference
Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome,
Or the light loss of England for a friend.
Forgo the easier.
In likeness of a new untrimmed bride.
The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith,
But from her need.
Which only lives but by the death of faith,
That need must needs infer this principle:
That faith would live again by death of need.
Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down.
The King is moved, and answers not to this.
Do so, King Philip. Hang no more in doubt.
Hang nothing but a calfskin, most sweet lout.
What canst thou say but will perplex thee more,
If thou stand excommunicate and cursed?
Good reverend father, make my person yours,
And tell me how you would bestow yourself.
This royal hand and mine are newly knit,
And the conjunction of our inward souls
Married, in league, coupled, and linked together
With all religious strength of sacred vows.
The latest breath that gave the sound of words
Was deep-sworn faith, peace, amity, true love
Between our kingdoms and our royal selves;
And even before this truce, but new before,
No longer than we well could wash our hands
To clap this royal bargain up of peace,
God knows they were besmeared and overstained
With slaughter's pencil, where revenge did paint
The fearful difference of incensed kings.
And shall these hands, so lately purged of blood,
So newly joined in love, so strong in both,
Unyoke this seizure and this kind regreet?
Play fast and loose with faith? So jest with heaven?
Make such unconstant children of ourselves
As now again to snatch our palm from palm,
Unswear faith sworn, and on the marriage bed
Of smiling peace to march a bloody host
And make a riot on the gentle brow
Of true sincerity? O holy sir,
My reverend father, let it not be so!
Out of your grace, devise, ordain, impose
Some gentle order, and then we shall be blest
To do your pleasure and continue friends.
All form is formless, order orderless,
Save what is opposite to England's love.
Therefore to arms! Be champion of our Church,
Or let the Church, our mother, breathe her curse,
France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue,
Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.
So mak'st thou faith an enemy to faith,
And like a civil war sett'st oath to oath,
Thy tongue against thy tongue. O, let thy vow
First made to God, first be to God performed,
That is, to be the champion of our Church!
What since thou swor'st is sworn against thyself
And may not be performed by thyself,
For that which thou hast sworn to do amiss
Is not amiss when it is truly done;
And being not done where doing tends to ill,
The truth is then most done not doing it.
The better act of purposes mistook
Is to mistake again; though indirect,
Yet indirection thereby grows direct,
And falsehood falsehood cures, as fire cools fire
Within the scorched veins of one new-burned.
It is religion that doth make vows kept,
But thou hast sworn against religion
By what thou swear'st against the thing thou
And mak'st an oath the surety for thy truth
Against an oath. The truth thou art unsure
To swear swears only not to be forsworn,
Else what a mockery should it be to swear?
But thou dost swear only to be forsworn,
And most forsworn to keep what thou dost swear.
Therefore thy later vows against thy first
Is in thyself rebellion to thyself.
And better conquest never canst thou make
Than arm thy constant and thy nobler parts
Against these giddy loose suggestions,
Upon which better part our prayers come in,
If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know
The peril of our curses light on thee
So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off,
But in despair die under their black weight.
Rebellion, flat rebellion!
Will not a calfskin stop that mouth of thine?
Father, to arms!
Against the blood that thou hast married?
What, shall our feast be kept with slaughtered men?
Shall braying trumpets and loud churlish drums,
Clamors of hell, be measures to our pomp?
Is "husband" in my mouth! Even for that name,
Which till this time my tongue did ne'er pronounce,
Upon my knee I beg, go not to arms
Against mine uncle.
Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee,
Thou virtuous Dauphin, alter not the doom
Forethought by heaven!
Now shall I see thy love. What motive may
Be stronger with thee than the name of wife?
That which upholdeth him that thee upholds,
His honor.--O, thine honor, Louis, thine honor!
When such profound respects do pull you on.
Thou shalt not need.--England, I will fall from
France, thou shalt rue this hour within this hour.
Old Time the clock-setter, that bald sexton Time,
Is it as he will? Well, then, France shall rue.
The sun's o'ercast with blood. Fair day, adieu.
Which is the side that I must go withal?
And in their rage, I having hold of both,
They whirl asunder and dismember me.
Husband, I cannot pray that thou mayst win.--
Uncle, I needs must pray that thou mayst lose.--
Father, I may not wish the fortune thine.--
Grandam, I will not wish thy wishes thrive.
Whoever wins, on that side shall I lose.
Assured loss before the match be played.
Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.
There where my fortune lives, there my life dies.
Cousin, go draw our puissance together.
France, I am burned up with inflaming wrath,
That nothing can allay, nothing but blood--
The blood, and dearest-valued blood, of France.
Thy rage shall burn thee up, and thou shalt turn
To ashes ere our blood shall quench that fire.
Look to thyself. Thou art in jeopardy.
No more than he that threats.--To arms let's hie!
Enter Bastard with Austria's head.]
Now, by my life, this day grows wondrous hot.
Some airy devil hovers in the sky
And pours down mischief. Austria's head lie there,
While Philip breathes.
Hubert, keep this boy.--Philip, make up.
My mother is assailed in our tent
And ta'en, I fear.
Her Highness is in safety, fear you not.
But on, my liege, for very little pains
Will bring this labor to an happy end.
Enter King John, Queen Eleanor, Arthur, Bastard,
Hubert, Lords.]
So shall it be. Your Grace shall stay behind
So strongly guarded.  Cousin, look not sad.
Thy grandam loves thee, and thy uncle will
As dear be to thee as thy father was.
Cousin, away for England! Haste before,
And ere our coining see thou shake the bags
Of hoarding abbots; imprisoned angels
Set at liberty. The fat ribs of peace
Must by the hungry now be fed upon.
Use our commission in his utmost force.
Bell, book, and candle shall not drive me back
When gold and silver becks me to come on.
If ever I remember to be holy,
For your fair safety. So I kiss your hand.
Farewell, gentle cousin.
Come hither, little kinsman. Hark, a word.
Come hither, Hubert.	
We owe thee much. Within this wall of flesh
There is a soul counts thee her creditor,
And with advantage means to pay thy love.
And, my good friend, thy voluntary oath
Lives in this bosom dearly cherished.
Give me thy hand. I had a thing to say,
But I will fit it with some better tune.
By heaven, Hubert, I am almost ashamed
To say what good respect I have of thee.
Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet,
But thou shalt have. And, creep time ne'er so slow,
Yet it shall come for me to do thee good.
The sun is in the heaven, and the proud day,
Attended with the pleasures of the world,
Is all too wanton and too full of gauds
To give me audience. If the midnight bell
Did with his iron tongue and brazen mouth
Sound on into the drowsy race of night;
If this same were a churchyard where we stand,
And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs;
Or if that surly spirit, melancholy,
Had baked thy blood and made it heavy, thick,
Which else runs tickling up and down the veins,
Making that idiot, laughter, keep men's eyes
And strain their cheeks to idle merriment,
Or if that thou couldst see me without eyes,
Hear me without thine ears, and make reply
Without a tongue, using conceit alone,
Without eyes, ears, and harmful sound of words;
Then, in despite of brooded watchful day,
But, ah, I will not. Yet I love thee well,
And by my troth I think thou lov'st me well.
So well that what you bid me undertake,
Though that my death were adjunct to my act,
By heaven, I would do it.
Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert, throw thine eye
On yon young boy. I'll tell thee what, my friend,
He is a very serpent in my way,
And wheresoe'er this foot of mine doth tread,
He lies before me. Dost thou understand me?
Thou art his keeper.
That he shall not offend your Majesty.
Death.
Well, I'll not say what I intend for thee.
Remember.  Madam, fare
Hubert shall be your man, attend on you
With all true duty.--On toward Calais, ho!
Pandulph, Attendants.]
So, by a roaring tempest on the flood,
Is scattered and disjoined from fellowship.
Courage and comfort. All shall yet go well.
What can go well when we have run so ill?
Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers lost?
Arthur ta'en prisoner? Divers dear friends slain?
And bloody England into England gone,
What he hath won, that hath he fortified.
So hot a speed, with such advice disposed,
Such temperate order in so fierce a cause,
Doth want example. Who hath read or heard
Of any kindred action like to this?
Well could I bear that England had this praise,
So we could find some pattern of our shame.
Look who comes here! A grave unto a soul,
Holding th' eternal spirit against her will
In the vile prison of afflicted breath.--
Lo, now, now see the issue of your peace!
Patience, good lady. Comfort, gentle Constance.
No, I defy all counsel, all redress,
But that which ends all counsel, true redress.
Death, death, O amiable, lovely death,
Thou odoriferous stench, sound rottenness,
Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,
Thou hate and terror to prosperity,
And I will kiss thy detestable bones
And put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows,
And ring these fingers with thy household worms,
And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust,
And be a carrion monster like thyself.
Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smil'st,
And buss thee as thy wife. Misery's love,
No, no, I will not, having breath to cry.
Then with a passion would I shake the world
And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy
Which cannot hear a lady's feeble voice,
Which scorns a modern invocation.
Lady, you utter madness and not sorrow.
Thou art not holy to belie me so.
My name is Constance; I was Geoffrey's wife;
Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost.
For then 'tis like I should forget myself.
Preach some philosophy to make me mad,
And thou shalt be canonized, cardinal.
For, being not mad but sensible of grief,
My reasonable part produces reason
How I may be delivered of these woes,
And teaches me to kill or hang myself.
If I were mad, I should forget my son,
Or madly think a babe of clouts were he.
The different plague of each calamity.
Bind up those tresses.--O, what love I note
In the fair multitude of those her hairs;
Where but by chance a silver drop hath fall'n,
Even to that drop ten thousand wiry friends
Do glue themselves in sociable grief,
Like true, inseparable, faithful loves,
Sticking together in calamity.
To England, if you will.
Yes, that I will. And wherefore will I do it?
As they have given these hairs their liberty!"
But now I envy at their liberty,
And will again commit them to their bonds,
Because my poor child is a prisoner.
And father cardinal, I have heard you say
That we shall see and know our friends in heaven.
If that be true, I shall see my boy again;
For since the birth of Cain, the first male child,
To him that did but yesterday suspire,
There was not such a gracious creature born.
But now will canker sorrow eat my bud
And chase the native beauty from his cheek,
And he will look as hollow as a ghost,
As dim and meager as an ague's fit,
And so he'll die; and, rising so again,
When I shall meet him in the court of heaven
Must I behold my pretty Arthur more.
You hold too heinous a respect of grief.
He talks to me that never had a son.
You are as fond of grief as of your child.
Grief fills the room up of my absent child,
Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,
Remembers me of all his gracious parts,
Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form;
Then, have I reason to be fond of grief?
Fare you well. Had you such a loss as I,
When there is such disorder in my wit.
My life, my joy, my food, my all the world,
My widow-comfort and my sorrows' cure!	
There's nothing in this world can make me joy.
Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale,
Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;
And bitter shame hath spoiled the sweet world's
That it yields naught but shame and bitterness.
Before the curing of a strong disease,
Even in the instant of repair and health,
The fit is strongest. Evils that take leave
On their departure most of all show evil.
What have you lost by losing of this day?
All days of glory, joy, and happiness.
If you had won it, certainly you had.
No, no. When Fortune means to men most good,
She looks upon them with a threat'ning eye.
In this which he accounts so clearly won.
Are not you grieved that Arthur is his prisoner?
As heartily as he is glad he hath him.
Your mind is all as youthful as your blood.
Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit.
For even the breath of what I mean to speak
Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub,
Out of the path which shall directly lead
Thy foot to England's throne. And therefore mark:
John hath seized Arthur, and it cannot be
That, whiles warm life plays in that infant's veins,
The misplaced John should entertain an hour,
One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest.
Must be as boisterously maintained as gained.
And he that stands upon a slipp'ry place
Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up.
That John may stand, then Arthur needs must fall.
So be it, for it cannot be but so.
But what shall I gain by young Arthur's fall?
You, in the right of Lady Blanche your wife,
May then make all the claim that Arthur did.
And lose it, life and all, as Arthur did.
How green you are and fresh in this old world!
John lays you plots. The times conspire with you,
For he that steeps his safety in true blood
Shall find but bloody safety, and untrue.
This act so evilly borne shall cool the hearts
Of all his people and freeze up their zeal,
That none so small advantage shall step forth
To check his reign but they will cherish it.
No natural exhalation in the sky,
No scope of nature, no distempered day,
No common wind, no customed event,
But they will pluck away his natural cause
And call them meteors, prodigies, and signs,
Abortives, presages, and tongues of heaven,
Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John.
Maybe he will not touch young Arthur's life,
But hold himself safe in his prisonment.
If that young Arthur be not gone already,
Even at that news he dies; and then the hearts
Of all his people shall revolt from him
And kiss the lips of unacquainted change,
And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath
Out of the bloody fingers' ends of John.
Methinks I see this hurly all on foot;
And, O, what better matter breeds for you
Than I have named! The bastard Faulconbridge
Is now in England ransacking the Church,
Offending charity. If but a dozen French
Were there in arms, they would be as a call
To train ten thousand English to their side,
Or as a little snow, tumbled about,
Anon becomes a mountain. O noble dauphin,
Go with me to the King. 'Tis wonderful
What may be wrought out of their discontent,
Now that their souls are topful of offense.
For England, go. I will whet on the King.
Strong reasons makes strange actions. Let us go.
If you say ay, the King will not say no.
Heat me these irons hot, and look thou stand
Within the arras. When I strike my foot
Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth
And bind the boy which you shall find with me
Fast to the chair. Be heedful. Hence, and watch.
Uncleanly scruples fear not you. Look to 't.
Young lad, come forth. I have to say with you.
Good morrow, Hubert.
As little prince, having so great a title
To be more prince, as may be. You are sad.
Indeed, I have been merrier.
Methinks nobody should be sad but I.
Yet I remember, when I was in France,
Young gentlemen would be as sad as night
Only for wantonness. By my christendom,
So I were out of prison and kept sheep,
And so I would be here but that I doubt
My uncle practices more harm to me.
He is afraid of me, and I of him.
Is it my fault that I was Geoffrey's son?
No, indeed, is 't not. And I would to heaven
If I talk to him, with his innocent prate
He will awake my mercy, which lies dead.
Therefore I will be sudden and dispatch.
Are you sick, Hubert? You look pale today.
In sooth, I would you were a little sick
That I might sit all night and watch with you.
His words do take possession of my bosom.
Read here, young Arthur.  How now,
Turning dispiteous torture out of door?
Out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears.--
Can you not read it? Is it not fair writ?
Too fairly, Hubert, for so foul effect.
Must you with hot irons burn out both mine eyes?
Young boy, I must.
Have you the heart? When your head did but ache,
The best I had, a princess wrought it me--
And I did never ask it you again;
And with my hand at midnight held your head,
And like the watchful minutes to the hour
Still and anon cheered up the heavy time,
Saying "What lack you?" and "Where lies your
Or "What good love may I perform for you?"
Many a poor man's son would have lien still
And ne'er have spoke a loving word to you;
But you at your sick service had a prince.
Nay, you may think my love was crafty love,
And call it cunning. Do, an if you will.
If heaven be pleased that you must use me ill,
Why then you must. Will you put out mine eyes--
These eyes that never did nor never shall
So much as frown on you?
And with hot irons must I burn them out.
Ah, none but in this Iron Age would do it.
The iron of itself, though heat red-hot,
Approaching near these eyes, would drink my tears
And quench this fiery indignation
Even in the matter of mine innocence;
Nay, after that, consume away in rust
But for containing fire to harm mine eye.
Are you more stubborn-hard than hammered iron?
An if an angel should have come to me
And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes,
Hubert's.
Do as I bid you do.
Even with the fierce looks of these bloody men.
Give me the iron, I say, and bind him here.
Alas, what need you be so boist'rous-rough?
For God's sake, Hubert, let me not be bound!
Nay, hear me, Hubert! Drive these men away,
And I will sit as quiet as a lamb.
Nor look upon the iron angerly.
Thrust but these men away, and I'll forgive you,
Whatever torment you do put me to.
Go stand within. Let me alone with him.
Alas, I then have chid away my friend!
He hath a stern look but a gentle heart.
Let him come back, that his compassion may
Give life to yours.
Is there no remedy?
Any annoyance in that precious sense.
Then, feeling what small things are boisterous
Your vile intent must needs seem horrible.
Is this your promise? Go to, hold your tongue.
Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues
Must needs want pleading for a pair of eyes.
Let me not hold my tongue. Let me not, Hubert,
Or, Hubert, if you will, cut out my tongue,
So I may keep mine eyes. O, spare mine eyes,
Though to no use but still to look on you.
Lo, by my troth, the instrument is cold,
And would not harm me.
No, in good sooth. The fire is dead with grief,
Being create for comfort, to be used
In undeserved extremes. See else yourself.
There is no malice in this burning coal.
The breath of heaven hath blown his spirit out
And strewed repentant ashes on his head.
But with my breath I can revive it, boy.
An if you do, you will but make it blush
And glow with shame of your proceedings, Hubert.
Nay, it perchance will sparkle in your eyes,
And, like a dog that is compelled to fight,
Snatch at his master that doth tar him on.
All things that you should use to do me wrong
Deny their office. Only you do lack
That mercy which fierce fire and iron extends,
Creatures of note for mercy-lacking uses.
Well, see to live. I will not touch thine eye
For all the treasure that thine uncle owes.
Yet am I sworn, and I did purpose, boy,
With this same very iron to burn them out.
You were disguised.
Your uncle must not know but you are dead.
And, pretty child, sleep doubtless and secure
That Hubert, for the wealth of all the world,
Will not offend thee.
Silence. No more. Go closely in with me.
Much danger do I undergo for thee.
Lords. King John ascends the throne.]
Here once again we sit, once again crowned
And looked upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes.
This "once again," but that your Highness pleased,
Was once superfluous. You were crowned before,
And that high royalty was ne'er plucked off,
The faiths of men ne'er stained with revolt;
Fresh expectation troubled not the land
With any longed-for change or better state.
Therefore, to be possessed with double pomp,
To guard a title that was rich before,
To gild refined gold, to paint the lily,
To throw a perfume on the violet,
To smooth the ice or add another hue
Unto the rainbow, or with taper-light
To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish,
Is wasteful and ridiculous excess.
But that your royal pleasure must be done,
This act is as an ancient tale new told,
And, in the last repeating, troublesome,
Being urged at a time unseasonable.
In this the antique and well-noted face
Of plain old form is much disfigured,
And like a shifted wind unto a sail,
It makes the course of thoughts to fetch about,
Startles and frights consideration,
Makes sound opinion sick and truth suspected
For putting on so new a fashioned robe.
When workmen strive to do better than well,
They do confound their skill in covetousness,
And oftentimes excusing of a fault
Doth make the fault the worse by th' excuse,
As patches set upon a little breach
Discredit more in hiding of the fault
Than did the fault before it was so patched.
To this effect, before you were new-crowned,
We breathed our counsel; but it pleased your
Highness
To overbear it, and we are all well pleased,
Since all and every part of what we would
Doth make a stand at what your Highness will.
Some reasons of this double coronation
And more, more strong, when lesser is my fear,
What you would have reformed that is not well,
And well shall you perceive how willingly
Then I, as one that am the tongue of these
To sound the purposes of all their hearts,
Both for myself and them, but chief of all
Your safety, for the which myself and them
Bend their best studies, heartily request
Th' enfranchisement of Arthur, whose restraint
Doth move the murmuring lips of discontent
To break into this dangerous argument:
If what in rest you have in right you hold,
Why then your fears, which, as they say, attend
The steps of wrong, should move you to mew up
Your tender kinsman and to choke his days
With barbarous ignorance and deny his youth
The rich advantage of good exercise.
That the time's enemies may not have this
To grace occasions, let it be our suit
That you have bid us ask, his liberty,
Which for our goods we do no further ask
Than whereupon our weal, on you depending,
Counts it your weal he have his liberty.
Let it be so. I do commit his youth
To your direction.
Hubert, what news with you?
This is the man should do the bloody deed.
He showed his warrant to a friend of mine.
The image of a wicked heinous fault
Lives in his eye. That close aspect of his
Doth show the mood of a much troubled breast,
And I do fearfully believe 'tis done
What we so feared he had a charge to do.
The color of the King doth come and go
Between his purpose and his conscience,
Like heralds 'twixt two dreadful battles set.
His passion is so ripe it needs must break.
And when it breaks, I fear will issue thence
The foul corruption of a sweet child's death.
We cannot hold mortality's strong hand.--
Good lords, although my will to give is living,
The suit which you demand is gone and dead.
He tells us Arthur is deceased tonight.
Indeed, we feared his sickness was past cure.
Indeed, we heard how near his death he was
Before the child himself felt he was sick.
This must be answered either here or hence.
Why do you bend such solemn brows on me?
Think you I bear the shears of destiny?
Have I commandment on the pulse of life?
It is apparent foul play, and 'tis shame
That greatness should so grossly offer it.
So thrive it in your game, and so farewell.
Stay yet, Lord Salisbury. I'll go with thee
And find th' inheritance of this poor child,
His little kingdom of a forced grave.
That blood which owed the breadth of all this isle,
Three foot of it doth hold. Bad world the while!
This must not be thus borne; this will break out
To all our sorrows, and ere long, I doubt.
They burn in indignation. I repent.
There is no sure foundation set on blood,
No certain life achieved by others' death.
That I have seen inhabit in those cheeks?
So foul a sky clears not without a storm.
Pour down thy weather: how goes all in France?
From France to England. Never such a power
For any foreign preparation
Was levied in the body of a land.
The copy of your speed is learned by them,
For when you should be told they do prepare,
The tidings comes that they are all arrived.
Where hath it slept? Where is my mother's care,
That such an army could be drawn in France
And she not hear of it?
Is stopped with dust. The first of April died
Your noble mother. And as I hear, my lord,
The Lady Constance in a frenzy died
Three days before. But this from rumor's tongue
Withhold thy speed, dreadful occasion!
My discontented peers. What? Mother dead?
How wildly then walks my estate in France!--
Under whose conduct came those powers of France
That thou for truth giv'st out are landed here?
Under the Dauphin.
With these ill tidings.
To your proceedings? Do not seek to stuff
My head with more ill news, for it is full.
But if you be afeard to hear the worst,
Then let the worst, unheard, fall on your head.
Bear with me, cousin, for I was amazed
Under the tide, but now I breathe again
Aloft the flood and can give audience
To any tongue, speak it of what it will.
How I have sped among the clergymen
The sums I have collected shall express.
But as I traveled hither through the land,
Possessed with rumors, full of idle dreams,
Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear.
And here's a prophet that I brought with me
From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found
With many hundreds treading on his heels,
To whom he sung in rude harsh-sounding rhymes
That ere the next Ascension Day at noon,
Your Highness should deliver up your crown.
Thou idle dreamer, wherefore didst thou so?
Foreknowing that the truth will fall out so.
Hubert, away with him! Imprison him.
And on that day at noon, whereon he says
Deliver him to safety and return,
For I must use thee.	
Hear'st thou the news abroad, who are arrived?
The French, my lord. Men's mouths are full of it.
Besides, I met Lord Bigot and Lord Salisbury
With eyes as red as new-enkindled fire,
And others more, going to seek the grave
Of Arthur, whom they say is killed tonight
On your suggestion.
And thrust thyself into their companies.
Bring them before me.
Nay, but make haste, the better foot before!
When adverse foreigners affright my towns
With dreadful pomp of stout invasion.
Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels,
And fly like thought from them to me again.
The spirit of the time shall teach me speed.
Spoke like a sprightful noble gentleman.
Some messenger betwixt me and the peers,
And be thou he.
My lord, they say five moons were seen tonight--
Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about
The other four in wondrous motion.
Five moons!
Do prophesy upon it dangerously.
Young Arthur's death is common in their mouths,
And when they talk of him, they shake their heads
And whisper one another in the ear,
And he that speaks doth grip the hearer's wrist,
Whilst he that hears makes fearful action
With wrinkled brows, with nods, with rolling eyes.
The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool,
With open mouth swallowing a tailor's news,
Who with his shears and measure in his hand,
Standing on slippers which his nimble haste
Had falsely thrust upon contrary feet,
Told of a many thousand warlike French
That were embattled and ranked in Kent.
Another lean, unwashed artificer
Cuts off his tale and talks of Arthur's death.
Why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears?
Why urgest thou so oft young Arthur's death?
Thy hand hath murdered him. I had a mighty cause
To wish him dead, but thou hadst none to kill him.
No had, my lord! Why, did you not provoke me?
It is the curse of kings to be attended
By slaves that take their humors for a warrant
To break within the bloody house of life,
And on the winking of authority
To understand a law, to know the meaning
Of dangerous majesty, when perchance it frowns
More upon humor than advised respect.
Here is your hand and seal for what I did.
Is to be made, then shall this hand and seal
Witness against us to damnation!
How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds
Make deeds ill done! Hadst not thou been by,
Quoted, and signed to do a deed of shame,
This murder had not come into my mind.
But taking note of thy abhorred aspect,
Finding thee fit for bloody villainy,
Apt, liable to be employed in danger,
And thou, to be endeared to a king,
Made it no conscience to destroy a prince.
Hadst thou but shook thy head or made a pause
When I spake darkly what I purposed,
Or turned an eye of doubt upon my face,
As bid me tell my tale in express words,
Deep shame had struck me dumb, made me break
And those thy fears might have wrought fears in me.
But thou didst understand me by my signs
And didst in signs again parley with sin,
Yea, without stop didst let thy heart consent
And consequently thy rude hand to act
The deed which both our tongues held vile to name.
Out of my sight, and never see me more.
My nobles leave me, and my state is braved,
Even at my gates, with ranks of foreign powers.
Nay, in the body of this fleshly land,
This kingdom, this confine of blood and breath,
Hostility and civil tumult reigns
Between my conscience and my cousin's death.
Arm you against your other enemies.
Young Arthur is alive. This hand of mine
Is yet a maiden and an innocent hand,
Not painted with the crimson spots of blood.
Within this bosom never entered yet
The dreadful motion of a murderous thought,
And you have slandered nature in my form,
Which, howsoever rude exteriorly,
Is yet the cover of a fairer mind
Than to be butcher of an innocent child.
Doth Arthur live? O, haste thee to the peers,
Throw this report on their incensed rage,
And make them tame to their obedience.
Forgive the comment that my passion made
Upon thy feature, for my rage was blind,
And foul imaginary eyes of blood
Presented thee more hideous than thou art.
The angry lords with all expedient haste.
The wall is high, and yet will I leap down.
Good ground, be pitiful and hurt me not.
There's few or none do know me. If they did,
This shipboy's semblance hath disguised me quite.
If I get down and do not break my limbs,
As good to die and go as die and stay.
Heaven take my soul, and England keep my bones.
Lords, I will meet him at Saint Edmundsbury;
It is our safety, and we must embrace
This gentle offer of the perilous time.
Who brought that letter from the Cardinal?
The Count Melun, a noble lord of France,
Whose private with me of the Dauphin's love
Is much more general than these lines import.
Tomorrow morning let us meet him, then.
Or rather then set forward, for 'twill be
Two long days' journey, lords, or ere we meet.
Once more today well met, distempered lords.
The King by me requests your presence straight.
The King hath dispossessed himself of us.
We will not line his thin bestained cloak
With our pure honors, nor attend the foot
That leaves the print of blood where'er it walks.
Return, and tell him so. We know the worst.
Whate'er you think, good words I think were best.
Our griefs and not our manners reason now.
But there is little reason in your grief.
Therefore 'twere reason you had manners now.
Sir, sir, impatience hath his privilege.
This is the prison.
What is he lies here?
The Earth had not a hole to hide this deed.
Murder, as hating what himself hath done,
Doth lay it open to urge on revenge.
Or when he doomed this beauty to a grave,
Found it too precious-princely for a grave.
Sir Richard, what think you? You have beheld.
Or have you read or heard, or could you think,
Or do you almost think, although you see,
That you do see? Could thought, without this object,
Form such another? This is the very top,
The height, the crest, or crest unto the crest,
Of murder's arms. This is the bloodiest shame,
The wildest savagery, the vilest stroke
That ever wall-eyed wrath or staring rage
Presented to the tears of soft remorse.
All murders past do stand excused in this.
And this, so sole and so unmatchable,
Shall give a holiness, a purity,
To the yet unbegotten sin of times
And prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest,
Exampled by this heinous spectacle.
It is a damned and a bloody work,
The graceless action of a heavy hand,
If that it be the work of any hand.
If that it be the work of any hand?
We had a kind of light what would ensue.
It is the shameful work of Hubert's hand,
The practice and the purpose of the King,
From whose obedience I forbid my soul,
Kneeling before this ruin of sweet life	
And breathing to his breathless excellence
The incense of a vow, a holy vow:
Never to taste the pleasures of the world,
Never to be infected with delight,
Nor conversant with ease and idleness,
Till I have set a glory to this hand
By giving it the worship of revenge.
Our souls religiously confirm thy words.
Lords, I am hot with haste in seeking you.
Arthur doth live; the King hath sent for you.
Avaunt, thou hateful villain, get thee gone!
Your sword is bright, sir. Put it up again.
Not till I sheathe it in a murderer's skin.
Stand back, Lord Salisbury, stand back, I say.
By heaven, I think my sword's as sharp as yours.
Nor tempt the danger of my true defense,
Lest I, by marking of your rage, forget
Your worth, your greatness, and nobility.
Out, dunghill! Dar'st thou brave a nobleman?
Not for my life. But yet I dare defend
My innocent life against an emperor.
Thou art a murderer.
Yet I am none. Whose tongue soe'er speaks false,
Not truly speaks. Who speaks not truly, lies.
Cut him to pieces.
Stand by, or I shall gall you, Faulconbridge.
Thou wert better gall the devil, Salisbury.
If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot,
Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame,
Or I'll so maul you and your toasting-iron
That you shall think the devil is come from hell.
What wilt thou do, renowned Faulconbridge?
Second a villain and a murderer?
Lord Bigot, I am none.
My date of life out for his sweet life's loss.
Trust not those cunning waters of his eyes,
For villainy is not without such rheum,
And he, long traded in it, makes it seem
Away with me, all you whose souls abhor
Th' uncleanly savors of a slaughterhouse,
For I am stifled with this smell of sin.
Away, toward Bury, to the Dauphin there.
There, tell the King, he may inquire us out.
Here's a good world! Knew you of this fair work?
Beyond the infinite and boundless reach
Of mercy, if thou didst this deed of death,
Art thou damned, Hubert.
Thou 'rt damned as black--nay, nothing is so black--
Thou art more deep damned than Prince Lucifer.
There is not yet so ugly a fiend of hell
As thou shalt be, if thou didst kill this child.
Upon my soul--
To this most cruel act, do but despair,
And if thou want'st a cord, the smallest thread
That ever spider twisted from her womb
Will serve to strangle thee; a rush will be a beam
To hang thee on. Or wouldst thou drown thyself,
Put but a little water in a spoon
And it shall be as all the ocean,
Enough to stifle such a villain up.
If I in act, consent, or sin of thought
Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath
Which was embounded in this beauteous clay,
Let hell want pains enough to torture me.
Among the thorns and dangers of this world.
How easy dost thou take all England up!
From forth this morsel of dead royalty,
The life, the right, and truth of all this realm
Is fled to heaven, and England now is left
To tug and scamble and to part by th' teeth
The unowed interest of proud-swelling state.
Now for the bare-picked bone of majesty
Doth dogged war bristle his angry crest
And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace.
Now powers from home and discontents at home
Meet in one line, and vast confusion waits,
As doth a raven on a sick-fall'n beast,
The imminent decay of wrested pomp.
Now happy he whose cloak and cincture can
Hold out this tempest. Bear away that child,
And follow me with speed. I'll to the King.
And heaven itself doth frown upon the land.
Thus have I yielded up into your hand
The circle of my glory.
From this my hand, as holding of the Pope,
Your sovereign greatness and authority.
Now keep your holy word. Go meet the French,
And from his Holiness use all your power
To stop their marches 'fore we are inflamed.
Our discontented counties do revolt,
Our people quarrel with obedience,
Swearing allegiance and the love of soul
To stranger blood, to foreign royalty.
This inundation of mistempered humor
Rests by you only to be qualified.
Then pause not, for the present time's so sick
That present med'cine must be ministered,
Or overthrow incurable ensues.
It was my breath that blew this tempest up,
Upon your stubborn usage of the Pope;
But since you are a gentle convertite,
My tongue shall hush again this storm of war
And make fair weather in your blust'ring land.
On this Ascension Day, remember well:
Upon your oath of service to the Pope,
Go I to make the French lay down their arms.
Is this Ascension Day? Did not the prophet
Say that before Ascension Day at noon
My crown I should give off? Even so I have.
But, God be thanked, it is but voluntary.
All Kent hath yielded. Nothing there holds out
But Dover Castle. London hath received
Like a kind host the Dauphin and his powers.
Your nobles will not hear you, but are gone
To offer service to your enemy;
And wild amazement hurries up and down
The little number of your doubtful friends.
Would not my lords return to me again
After they heard young Arthur was alive?
They found him dead and cast into the streets,
An empty casket where the jewel of life
By some damned hand was robbed and ta'en away.
That villain Hubert told me he did live!
So, on my soul, he did, for aught he knew.
But wherefore do you droop? Why look you sad?
Be great in act, as you have been in thought.
Let not the world see fear and sad distrust
Govern the motion of a kingly eye.
Be stirring as the time; be fire with fire;
Threaten the threat'ner, and outface the brow
Of bragging horror. So shall inferior eyes,
That borrow their behaviors from the great,
Grow great by your example and put on
The dauntless spirit of resolution.
Away, and glister like the god of war
When he intendeth to become the field.
Show boldness and aspiring confidence.
What, shall they seek the lion in his den
And fright him there? And make him tremble there?
To meet displeasure farther from the doors,
And grapple with him ere he come so nigh.
The legate of the Pope hath been with me,
And I have made a happy peace with him,
And he hath promised to dismiss the powers
Led by the Dauphin.
Shall we upon the footing of our land
Send fair-play orders and make compromise,
Insinuation, parley, and base truce
To arms invasive? Shall a beardless boy,
And flesh his spirit in a warlike soil,
Mocking the air with colors idly spread,
And find no check? Let us, my liege, to arms!
Perchance the Cardinal cannot make your peace;
Or if he do, let it at least be said
They saw we had a purpose of defense.
Have thou the ordering of this present time.
Away, then, with good courage!  Yet I
Our party may well meet a prouder foe.
Pembroke, Bigot, and French and English Soldiers.]
My Lord Melun, let this be copied out,
And keep it safe for our remembrance.
Return the precedent to these lords again,
That having our fair order written down,
Both they and we, perusing o'er these notes,
May know wherefore we took the Sacrament,
And keep our faiths firm and inviolable.
Upon our sides it never shall be broken.
And, noble dauphin, albeit we swear
To your proceedings, yet believe me, prince,
Should seek a plaster by contemned revolt
And heal the inveterate canker of one wound
By making many. O, it grieves my soul
That I must draw this metal from my side
To be a widow-maker! O, and there
Where honorable rescue and defense
Cries out upon the name of Salisbury!
But such is the infection of the time
That for the health and physic of our right,
We cannot deal but with the very hand
Of stern injustice and confused wrong.
And is 't not pity, O my grieved friends,
That we, the sons and children of this isle,
Was born to see so sad an hour as this,
Wherein we step after a stranger, march
Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up
Her enemies' ranks? I must withdraw and weep
Upon the spot of this enforced cause,
To grace the gentry of a land remote,
And follow unacquainted colors here.
What, here? O nation, that thou couldst remove,
That Neptune's arms, who clippeth thee about,
Would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself
And grapple thee unto a pagan shore,
Where these two Christian armies might combine
The blood of malice in a vein of league,
And not to spend it so unneighborly.	
And great affections wrestling in thy bosom
Doth make an earthquake of nobility.
Between compulsion and a brave respect!
Let me wipe off this honorable dew
That silverly doth progress on thy cheeks.
My heart hath melted at a lady's tears,
Being an ordinary inundation,
But this effusion of such manly drops,
This shower, blown up by tempest of the soul,
Startles mine eyes and makes me more amazed
Than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven
Figured quite o'er with burning meteors.
Lift up thy brow, renowned Salisbury,
And with a great heart heave away this storm.
Commend these waters to those baby eyes
That never saw the giant world enraged,
Nor met with fortune other than at feasts
Full warm of blood, of mirth, of gossiping.
Come, come; for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep
Into the purse of rich prosperity
As Louis himself.--So, nobles, shall you all,
That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.
And even there, methinks, an angel spake.
Look where the holy legate comes apace
To give us warrant from the hand of God,
And on our actions set the name of right
With holy breath.
The next is this: King John hath reconciled
Himself to Rome; his spirit is come in
That so stood out against the holy Church,
The great metropolis and See of Rome.
Therefore thy threat'ning colors now wind up,
And tame the savage spirit of wild war
That, like a lion fostered up at hand,
It may lie gently at the foot of peace
And be no further harmful than in show.
Your Grace shall pardon me; I will not back.
To be a secondary at control,
Or useful servingman and instrument
To any sovereign state throughout the world.
Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars
Between this chastised kingdom and myself
And brought in matter that should feed this fire;
And now 'tis far too huge to be blown out
With that same weak wind which enkindled it.
You taught me how to know the face of right,
Acquainted me with interest to this land,
Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart.
And come you now to tell me John hath made
His peace with Rome? What is that peace to me?
After young Arthur claim this land for mine.
And now it is half conquered, must I back
Because that John hath made his peace with Rome?
Am I Rome's slave? What penny hath Rome borne?
What men provided? What munition sent
To underprop this action? Is 't not I
That undergo this charge? Who else but I,
And such as to my claim are liable,
Sweat in this business and maintain this war?
Have I not heard these islanders shout out
Have I not here the best cards for the game
To win this easy match played for a crown?
And shall I now give o'er the yielded set?
No, no, on my soul, it never shall be said.
You look but on the outside of this work.
Outside or inside, I will not return
Till my attempt so much be glorified
As to my ample hope was promised
Before I drew this gallant head of war
And culled these fiery spirits from the world
To outlook conquest and to win renown
Even in the jaws of danger and of death.
What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us?
According to the fair play of the world,
Let me have audience. I am sent to speak,
My holy lord of Milan, from the King.
And, as you answer, I do know the scope
And warrant limited unto my tongue.
The Dauphin is too willful-opposite
And will not temporize with my entreaties.
He flatly says he'll not lay down his arms.
By all the blood that ever fury breathed,
The youth says well! Now hear our English king,
For thus his royalty doth speak in me:
He is prepared--and reason too he should.
This apish and unmannerly approach,
This harnessed masque and unadvised revel,
This unheard sauciness and boyish troops,
The King doth smile at, and is well prepared
To whip this dwarfish war, these pigmy arms,
From out the circle of his territories.
That hand which had the strength, even at your door,
To cudgel you and make you take the hatch,
To dive like buckets in concealed wells,
To crouch in litter of your stable planks,
To lie like pawns locked up in chests and trunks,
To hug with swine, to seek sweet safety out
In vaults and prisons, and to thrill and shake
Even at the crying of your nation's crow,
Thinking this voice an armed Englishman--
Shall that victorious hand be feebled here
That in your chambers gave you chastisement?
No! Know the gallant monarch is in arms,
And like an eagle o'er his aerie towers
To souse annoyance that comes near his nest.--
And you degenerate, you ingrate revolts,
You bloody Neroes, ripping up the womb
Of your dear mother England, blush for shame!
For your own ladies and pale-visaged maids
Like Amazons come tripping after drums,
Their thimbles into armed gauntlets change,
Their needles to lances, and their gentle hearts
To fierce and bloody inclination.
There end thy brave and turn thy face in peace.
We grant thou canst outscold us. Fare thee well.
We hold our time too precious to be spent
With such a brabbler.
No, I will speak.
Strike up the drums, and let the tongue of war
Plead for our interest and our being here.
Indeed, your drums being beaten will cry out,
And so shall you, being beaten. Do but start
An echo with the clamor of thy drum,
And even at hand a drum is ready braced
That shall reverberate all as loud as thine.
Sound but another, and another shall,
As loud as thine, rattle the welkin's ear
And mock the deep-mouthed thunder. For at hand,
Not trusting to this halting legate here,
Whom he hath used rather for sport than need,
Is warlike John, and in his forehead sits
To feast upon whole thousands of the French.
Strike up our drums to find this danger out.
And thou shalt find it, dauphin, do not doubt.
How goes the day with us? O, tell me, Hubert.
Badly, I fear. How fares your Majesty?
This fever that hath troubled me so long
Lies heavy on me. O, my heart is sick.
My lord, your valiant kinsman, Faulconbridge,
Desires your Majesty to leave the field
And send him word by me which way you go.
Tell him toward Swinstead, to the abbey there.
Be of good comfort, for the great supply
That was expected by the Dauphin here
Are wracked three nights ago on Goodwin Sands.
This news was brought to Richard but even now.
The French fight coldly and retire themselves.
Ay me, this tyrant fever burns me up
And will not let me welcome this good news.
Set on toward Swinstead. To my litter straight.
Weakness possesseth me, and I am faint.
Up once again. Put spirit in the French.
If they miscarry, we miscarry too.
That misbegotten devil, Faulconbridge,
In spite of spite, alone upholds the day.
They say King John, sore sick, hath left the field.
Lead me to the revolts of England here.
When we were happy, we had other names.
It is the Count Melun.
Fly, noble English; you are bought and sold.
Unthread the rude eye of rebellion
And welcome home again discarded faith.
Seek out King John and fall before his feet,
For if the French be lords of this loud day,
He means to recompense the pains you take
By cutting off your heads. Thus hath he sworn,
And I with him, and many more with me,
Upon the altar at Saint Edmundsbury,
Even on that altar where we swore to you
Dear amity and everlasting love.
May this be possible? May this be true?
Have I not hideous death within my view,
Retaining but a quantity of life,
Which bleeds away even as a form of wax
Resolveth from his figure 'gainst the fire?
What in the world should make me now deceive,
Since I must lose the use of all deceit?
Why should I then be false, since it is true
That I must die here and live hence by truth?
He is forsworn if e'er those eyes of yours
Behold another daybreak in the East.
But even this night, whose black contagious breath
Already smokes about the burning crest
Of the old, feeble, and day-wearied sun,
Even this ill night your breathing shall expire,
Paying the fine of rated treachery
Even with a treacherous fine of all your lives,
If Louis by your assistance win the day.
Commend me to one Hubert with your king;
The love of him, and this respect besides,
For that my grandsire was an Englishman,
Awakes my conscience to confess all this.
In lieu whereof, I pray you bear me hence
From forth the noise and rumor of the field,
Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts
In peace, and part this body and my soul
With contemplation and devout desires.
We do believe thee, and beshrew my soul
But I do love the favor and the form
Of this most fair occasion, by the which
We will untread the steps of damned flight,
And like a bated and retired flood,
Leaving our rankness and irregular course,
Stoop low within those bounds we have o'erlooked
And calmly run on in obedience
Even to our ocean, to our great King John.
My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence,
For I do see the cruel pangs of death
Right in thine eye.--Away, my friends! New flight,
And happy newness, that intends old right.
The sun of heaven, methought, was loath to set,
But stayed and made the western welkin blush,
When English measured backward their own
In faint retire. O, bravely came we off,
When with a volley of our needless shot,
After such bloody toil, we bid good night
And wound our tott'ring colors clearly up,
Last in the field and almost lords of it.
Where is my prince, the Dauphin?
The Count Melun is slain. The English lords,
By his persuasion, are again fall'n off,
And your supply, which you have wished so long,
Are cast away and sunk on Goodwin Sands.
Ah, foul, shrewd news. Beshrew thy very heart!
As this hath made me. Who was he that said
King John did fly an hour or two before
The stumbling night did part our weary powers?
Whoever spoke it, it is true, my lord.
Well, keep good quarter and good care tonight.
The day shall not be up so soon as I
To try the fair adventure of tomorrow.
Who's there? Speak ho! Speak quickly, or I shoot.
Whither dost thou go?
Why may not I demand of thine affairs
As well as thou of mine? Hubert, I think?
Thou art my friend, that know'st my tongue so well.
Who art thou?
Thou mayst befriend me so much as to think
Unkind remembrance! Thou and endless night
Have done me shame. Brave soldier, pardon me
That any accent breaking from thy tongue
Should 'scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.
Come, come. Sans compliment, what news abroad?
Why, here walk I in the black brow of night
To find you out.
Black, fearful, comfortless, and horrible.
Show me the very wound of this ill news.
The King, I fear, is poisoned by a monk.
To acquaint you with this evil, that you might
The better arm you to the sudden time
Than if you had at leisure known of this.
How did he take it? Who did taste to him?
Whose bowels suddenly burst out. The King
Yet speaks and peradventure may recover.
Who didst thou leave to tend his Majesty?
Why, know you not? The lords are all come back,
And brought Prince Henry in their company,
At whose request the King hath pardoned them,
And they are all about his Majesty.
Withhold thine indignation, mighty God,
And tempt us not to bear above our power.
Passing these flats, are taken by the tide.
These Lincoln Washes have devoured them.
Myself, well mounted, hardly have escaped.
Away before. Conduct me to the King.
It is too late. The life of all his blood
Is touched corruptibly, and his pure brain,
Which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling-house,
Doth, by the idle comments that it makes,
Foretell the ending of mortality.
His Highness yet doth speak, and holds belief
That being brought into the open air
It would allay the burning quality
Of that fell poison which assaileth him.
Let him be brought into the orchard here.
Doth he still rage?
Than when you left him. Even now he sung.
In their continuance will not feel themselves.
Death, having preyed upon the outward parts,
Leaves them invisible, and his siege is now
Against the mind, the which he pricks and wounds
With many legions of strange fantasies,
Which in their throng and press to that last hold
Confound themselves. 'Tis strange that Death should
Who chants a doleful hymn to his own death,
And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings
His soul and body to their lasting rest.
Be of good comfort, prince, for you are born
To set a form upon that indigest
Which he hath left so shapeless and so rude.
Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room.
It would not out at windows nor at doors.
There is so hot a summer in my bosom
That all my bowels crumble up to dust.
Upon a parchment, and against this fire
Do I shrink up.
Poisoned--ill fare--dead, forsook, cast off,
And none of you will bid the winter come
To thrust his icy fingers in my maw,
Nor let my kingdom's rivers take their course
Through my burned bosom, nor entreat the North
To make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips
And comfort me with cold. I do not ask you much.
And so ingrateful, you deny me that.
That might relieve you!
Within me is a hell, and there the poison
Is, as a fiend, confined to tyrannize
On unreprievable, condemned blood.
And spleen of speed to see your Majesty.
The tackle of my heart is cracked and burnt,
And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail
Are turned to one thread, one little hair.
My heart hath one poor string to stay it by,
Which holds but till thy news be uttered,
And then all this thou seest is but a clod
And module of confounded royalty.
The Dauphin is preparing hitherward,
Where God He knows how we shall answer him.
For in a night the best part of my power,
As I upon advantage did remove,
Were in the Washes all unwarily
Devoured by the unexpected flood.
You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear.--
My liege! My lord!--But now a king, now thus.
Even so must I run on, and even so stop.
What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,
When this was now a king and now is clay?
Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind
To do the office for thee of revenge,
And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven,
As it on Earth hath been thy servant still.--
Now, now, you stars, that move in your right spheres,
Where be your powers? Show now your mended
And instantly return with me again
To push destruction and perpetual shame
Out of the weak door of our fainting land.
Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought;
The Dauphin rages at our very heels.
It seems you know not, then, so much as we.
The Cardinal Pandulph is within at rest,
Who half an hour since came from the Dauphin,
And brings from him such offers of our peace
As we with honor and respect may take,
With purpose presently to leave this war.
He will the rather do it when he sees
Ourselves well-sinewed to our defense.
Nay, 'tis in a manner done already,
For many carriages he hath dispatched
To the sea-side, and put his cause and quarrel
To the disposing of the Cardinal,
With whom yourself, myself, and other lords,
If you think meet, this afternoon will post
To consummate this business happily.
Let it be so.--And you, my noble prince,
With other princes that may best be spared,
Shall wait upon your father's funeral.
At Worcester must his body be interred,
For so he willed it.
And happily may your sweet self put on
The lineal state and glory of the land,
To whom with all submission on my knee
And true subjection everlastingly.	
And the like tender of our love we make
To rest without a spot forevermore.
And knows not how to do it but with tears.
Since it hath been beforehand with our griefs.
This England never did nor never shall
Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror
But when it first did help to wound itself.
Now these her princes are come home again,
Come the three corners of the world in arms
And we shall shock them. Naught shall make us rue,
If England to itself do rest but true.
Star-Chamber matter of it. If he were twenty Sir
John Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow,
Esquire.
Master Parson, who writes himself "Armigero"
Falstaff have committed disparagements unto you,
Thomas Page, which is pretty virginity.
Master Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.
Got pless your house here.
Justice Shallow, and here young Master Slender,
Page? And I thank you always with my heart, la,
Shallow, Esquire, saith he is wronged.
That is now answered.
Nym, and Pistol.
Can you tell, cousin?
For, though I cannot remember what I did when
God, and not with drunken knaves.
You hear it.
How now, Simple? Where have you been? I must
Riddles about you, have you?
Alice Shortcake upon Allhallowmas last, a fortnight
Anne Page.
What I do is to pleasure you, coz. Can you love the
Simple.)] Go, sirrah, for all you are my man, go
Justice of Peace sometime may be beholding to his
You do yourself wrong, indeed, la!
Quickly, which is in the manner of his nurse,
Pheazar. I will entertain Bardolph. He shall draw,
His thefts were too open. His filching was like an
Humor me the angels.
Here's another letter to her. She bears the purse
Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go bear thou
Ford. We will thrive, lads, we will thrive.
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear steel? Then Lucifer take all!
Hold, sirrah, bear you these letters tightly;
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.--
Rogues, hence, avaunt, vanish like hailstones, go,
Trudge, plod away i' th' hoof, seek shelter, pack!
Falstaff will learn the humor of the age:
French thrift, you rogues--myself and skirted page.
Let vultures gripe thy guts! For gourd and fullam
And high and low beguiles the rich and poor.
Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
Base Phrygian Turk!
And I to Page shall eke unfold
His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
Rugby.)] I pray thee, go to the casement and see if
If he do, i' faith, and find anybody in the
John! What, John, I say! Go, John, go enquire for
Pray you, go and vetch me in my closet un boitier
Rugby. Come, take-a your rapier, and come after
Larron!  Rugby, my
Hear the truth of it. He came of an errand to me
Rugby, baille me some paper.--Tarry you a little-a
But notwithstanding that, I know Anne's mind.
That's neither here nor there.
Host of de Jarteer to measure our weapon. By gar,
Mistress Quickly.)] By gar, if I have not Anne Page,
Worship to ask.
But notwithstanding, Master Fenton, I'll be sworn
Truly an honest gentleman--but Anne loves him
Ask me no reason why I love you, for though Love
Ha, ha, then, there's more sympathy. You love sack,
John Falstaff.
What a Herod of Jewry is this! O wicked, wicked
Why, he hath not been thrice in my company!
What should I say to him? I was then frugal of my
How shall I be revenged on him? For revenged I
You look very ill.
What is it? Dispense with trifles. What is it?
Page and Ford differs! To thy great comfort in this
Let's appoint him a meeting, give him a show of
Host of the Garter.
Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs.
Sir John affects thy wife.
He woos both high and low, both rich and poor,
Both young and old, one with another, Ford.
He loves the gallimaufry. Ford, perpend.
With liver burning hot. Prevent,
Or go thou like Sir Acteon, he,
With Ringwood at thy heels.
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by
Take heed, ere summer comes or cuckoo birds do
Away, Sir Corporal Nym.--Believe it, Page. He
He loves your wife; there's the short and the long.
My name is Corporal Nym. I speak and I avouch.
George?  Look who
She shall be our messenger to this paltry knight.
Mistress Quickly exit.]
Cavaleiro Justice, I say!
Sir Hugh the Welsh priest and Caius the French
My merry Host hath had the measuring of their
Brook. It is a merry knight. 
Page.)] Will you go, ameers?
Page; 'tis here, 'tis here. I have seen the time, with
And when Mistress Bridget lost the handle of her
Lord, Lord, your Worship's a wanton! Well, heaven
Ford, her husband, will be from home. Alas, the
But Mistress Page would desire you to send her
Master Page is an honest man. Never a wife in
Windsor leads a better life than she does. Do what
There's my purse.  I am yet
Quickly and Robin exit.)] This news distracts
This punk is one of Cupid's carriers.
Clap on more sails, pursue; up with your fights;
Give fire! She is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!
Ah ha, Mistress Ford and Mistress Page, have I encompassed
Sir John, as you have one eye upon my follies, as
Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues."
Use your art of wooing; win her to consent to you.
If any man may, you may as soon as any.
John?
Do you know Ford, sir?
Brook, shalt know him for knave and cuckold.
Come to me soon at night.	
Would any man have thought this? See the hell of
The devil himself hath not such a name. Page
Eleven o'clock the hour. I will prevent this,
By gar, Jack Rugby, he is dead already if he be
Is he dead, my Francisco? Ha, bully? What says
Is he dead, bully stale? Is he dead?
Greece, my boy!
Is it not true, Master Page?
Doctor Caius, I am come to fetch you home. I am
Monsieur Mockwater.
Master Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender, go you
Doctor.	
Anne Page is, at a farmhouse a-feasting, and
Anne Page. Said I well?
Mercy on me, I have a great dispositions to cry.
Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?
Master Shallow, and another gentleman, from
Frogmore, over the stile, this way.
Parson.
Caius and Sir Hugh offer to fight.]
John ape.
Host of the Garter.
Sir Hugh? No, he gives me the proverbs and the
There is such a league between my goodman and
He gives her folly motion and advantage. And now
Falstaff's boy with her! Good plots they are laid,
Well, I will take him, then torture my wife, pluck
Mistress Page, divulge Page himself for a secure
Evans, Doctor Caius, and Rugby.]
Anne Page and my cousin Slender, and this day we
He capers, he dances, he has eyes of youth, he
And you, Sir Hugh.
Falstaff, and drink canary with him.	
Robert, be ready here hard by in the brewhouse,
Mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch close
Why, now let me die, for I have lived long enough.
This is the period of my ambition. O, this blessed
Mistress Ford. Now shall I sin in my wish: I would
Come, thou canst not hide it.
Come, I cannot cog and say thou art this and that
Bucklersbury in simple time. I cannot. But I love
Mistress Page.
Page at the door, sweating and blowing and looking
What's the matter? How now?
You're shamed, you're overthrown, you're undone
How am I mistook in you!
You are undone.
Go, take up these clothes here quickly. Where's the
Buck, buck, buck! Ay, buck! I warrant you, buck,
Gentlemen, I have dreamed tonight; I'll tell you my
Quickly to him, and excuse his throwing into
Ford.
What spirit, what devil suggests this imagination?
But, trust me, we'll mock him. 
Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.
Alas, how then?
He doth object I am too great of birth,
And that, my state being galled with my expense,
Besides these, other bars he lays before me--
My riots past, my wild societies--
And tells me 'tis a thing impossible
No, heaven so speed me in my time to come!
Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth
Was the first motive that I wooed thee, Anne,
Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value
Than stamps in gold or sums in sealed bags.
And 'tis the very riches of thyself
That now I aim at.
Yet seek my father's love, still seek it, sir.
If opportunity and humblest suit
Cannot attain it, why then--hark you hither.
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year!
Pray you, a word with you.	
Mistress Anne the jest how my father stole two
Gloucestershire.
Here he comes.
Now, Master Slender.--Love him, daughter Anne.--
Why, how now? What does Master Fenton here?
You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house.
Nay, Master Page, be not impatient.
Good Master Fenton, come not to my child.
Come Master Shallow.--Come, son Slender, in.--
Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.
Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all checks, rebukes, and manners,
And not retire. Let me have your good will.
Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.
Alas, I had rather be set quick i' th' earth
And bowled to death with turnips!
Come, trouble not yourself.--Good Master Fenton,
My daughter will I question how she loves you,
And as I find her, so am I affected.
Till then, farewell, sir. She must needs go in;
Her father will be angry.
Farewell, gentle mistress.--Farewell, Nan.
Give my sweet Nan this ring. There's for thy pains.
Master Slender had her, or, in sooth, I would Master
Fenton had her. I will do what I can for them all
Have I lived to be carried in a basket like a barrow
Well, if I be served such another trick, I'll have my
Thames water, for my belly's as cold as if I had
How now?
Ford's approach, and, in her invention and Ford's
Well, on went he for a search, and away went I for
It was a miracle to 'scape suffocation. And in
Brook.
Come to me at your convenient leisure,
Adieu. You shall have her, Master Brook. Master
Brook, you shall cuckold Ford.	
There's a hole made in your best coat, Master
Ford. This 'tis to be married; this 'tis to have linen
But truly he is very courageous mad about
Look where his master comes. 'Tis a playing day, I
Come.
Answer your master. Be not afraid.
William?
Accusativo, hung, hang, hog.
Page.
Now he shall see his own foolery.
But what make you here?
Brentford, has a gown above.
Brentford. He swears she's a witch, forbade her my
We'll leave a proof, by that which we will do,
Wives may be merry and yet honest too.
We do not act that often jest and laugh;
Evans, and Shallow.]
Behold what honest clothes you send forth to
Come hither, Mistress Ford.--Mistress Ford, the
Why may not he be there again? In my house I am
This wrongs you.
Let me forever be your table-sport. Let them say of
Page! Come you and the old woman down. My
See but the issue of my jealousy. If I cry out
Sir Hugh Evans.]
Pardon me, wife. Henceforth do what thou wilt.
Than thee with wantonness. Now doth thy honor
In him that was of late an heretic,
As firm as faith.
Be not as extreme in submission as in offense.
But let our plot go forward. Let our wives
Yet once again, to make us public sport,
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.
There is no better way than that they spoke of.
Methinks there should be terrors in him, that he
Devise but how you'll use him when he comes,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.
There is an old tale goes that Herne the Hunter,
Sometime a keeper here in Windsor Forest,
Doth all the wintertime, at still midnight,
Walk round about an oak, with great ragged horns,
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
And makes milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a
In a most hideous and dreadful manner.
You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
The superstitious idle-headed eld
Received and did deliver to our age
This tale of Herne the Hunter for a truth.
Why, yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak.
But what of this?
That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us.
Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come.
And in this shape when you have brought him
What shall be done with him? What is your plot?
That likewise have we thought upon, and thus:
Nan Page my daughter, and my little son,
And three or four more of their growth we'll dress
Like urchins, aufs, and fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads
And rattles in their hands. Upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she, and I are newly met,
Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
With some diffused song. Upon their sight,
We two in great amazedness will fly.
Then let them all encircle him about,
And, fairy-like, to pinch the unclean knight,
And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
In shape profane.
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound
And burn him with their tapers.
We'll all present ourselves, dis-horn the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor.
Be practiced well to this, or they'll ne'er do 't.
My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies,
Finely attired in a robe of white.
That silk will I go buy.  And in that time
Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away
And marry her at Eton.--Go, send to Falstaff
Nay, I'll to him again in name of Brook.
He'll tell me all his purpose. Sure he'll come.
Fear not you that. Go get us properties
And tricking for our fairies.
Send quickly to Sir John to know his mind.
And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
That Slender, though well-landed, is an idiot,
And he my husband best of all affects.
The doctor is well-moneyed, and his friends
Potent at court. He, none but he, shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.
Speak, breathe, discuss; brief, short, quick,
Fie!
Brentford?
Anne Page, to know if it were my master's fortune
Doctor Faustuses.
Fare you well.
Jamanie. By my trot, dere is no duke that the court
Now, whence come you?
Brentford. But that my admirable dexterity of wit,
Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose,
And, as I am a gentleman, I'll give thee
From time to time I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page,
Who mutually hath answered my affection,
So far forth as herself might be her chooser,
Even to my wish. I have a letter from her
Of such contents as you will wonder at,
The mirth whereof so larded with my matter
That neither singly can be manifested
Without the show of both. Fat Falstaff
Hath a great scene; the image of the jest
Tonight at Herne's oak, just 'twixt twelve and one,
Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen--
The purpose why is here--in which disguise,
While other jests are something rank on foot,
Her father hath commanded her to slip
Away with Slender, and with him at Eton
